<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV: Four?</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">Four?</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Before I give the extracts from Trenchard’s diary that follow I would like to say that I do not believe that Trenchard had any thought whatever, as he wrote, of publication. He says quite clearly that he wrote simply for his own satisfaction and later interest. At the same time I am convinced that he would not now object to their publication. If he had been here he would, I know, have supported my intention. The diary lies before me, here on my table, written in two yellow, stiff-covered manuscript books without lines. They are written very unevenly and untidily, with very few erasures, but at times incoherently and with gaps. In one place he has cut from the newspaper Rupert Brooke’s sonnet, beginning:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“<em>Blow out, you Bugles, over the rich Dead!</em>”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">and pasted it on to the blank page.</p>
			<p>At times he sticks on to the other pages newspaper descriptions that have pleased him. His own descriptions of the Forest seem to me influenced by my talks with him, and I remember that it was Nikitin who spoke of the light like a glass ball and of the green-like water. For the most part he exhibits, from the beginning of the diary to the end, extreme practical common sense and he makes, I fancy, a very strong effort to record quite simply and even naively the truth as he sees it. At other times he is quite frankly incoherent.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>I will give, on another page, my impression of him when I saw him on my return to the Forest. I am, of course, in no way responsible for inconsistencies or irrelevances. He had kept a diary since his first coming to the war and I have already given some extracts from it. The earlier diary, in one place only, namely his account of his adventure during his night with Nikitin, is of the full descriptive order. That one occasion I have already quoted in its entirety. With that exception the early diary is brief and concerned only with the dryest recital of events. After the death of Marie Ivanovna, however, its character entirely changes for reasons which he himself shows. I would have expected perhaps a certain solemnity or even pomposity in the style of it; he had never a strong sense of humour. But I find it written in the very simplest fashion; words here and there are misspelt and his handwriting is large and round like a schoolboy’s.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><i>Thursday, July 29th.</i> I intend to write this diary with great fullness for two reasons⁠—in the first place because I can see that it is of the greatest importance, if one is to get through this business properly, to leave no hours empty. The trying thing in this affair is having nothing to do⁠—nothing one can <em>possibly</em> do. They all, officers, soldiers, from Nikolai Nikolaievitch to my Nikolai here, will tell you that. No empty hours for me if I can help it.⁠ ⁠… Secondly, I really do wish to record exactly my experiences here. I am perfectly aware that when I’m out of it all, when it’s even a day’s march behind me, I shall regard it as frankly incredible⁠—not the thing itself but the way I felt about it. When I come out of it into the world again I shall be overwhelmed with other people’s impressions of it, people far cleverer than I. There will be brilliant descriptions of battles, of what it feels like to be under fire, of marches, victories, retreats, wounds, death⁠—everything. I shall forget what my own little tiny piece of it was like⁠—and I don’t want to forget. I want intensely to remember the truth <em>always</em>, because the truth is bound up with Marie, and Marie with the truth. Why need I be shy now about her? Why should I hesitate, under the fear of my own later timidity, of saying exactly now what I feel? God knows what I <em>do</em> feel! I am confused, half-numb, half-dead, I believe, with moments of fiery biting realisation. I’m neither sad, nor happy⁠—only breathlessly expectant. The only adventure I have ever had in my life is not⁠—no, it is not⁠—yet ended. And I know that Marie could not have left me like that, without a word, unless she were returning or were going to send for me.</p>
				<p>Meanwhile today a beastly thing has happened, a thing that will make life much harder for me here. All the morning there was work. Bandaged twenty⁠—had fifty in altogether⁠—sent thirty-four on, kept the rest. Two died during the morning. This isn’t really a good place to be, it’s so hemmed in with trees. We ought to be somewhere more open. The Forest is unhealthy, too. There’s been fighting in and out of it almost since the war began⁠—it <em>can’t</em> be healthy. In this hot weather the place <em>smells</em>.⁠ ⁠… Then there are the Flies. I write them with a capital letter because I’ve got to keep my head about the Flies. Does anyone at home or away from this infernal strip of fighting realise what flies are? Of course one’s read of the tropical sorts, all red and stinging, or white and bloated⁠—what you like, evil and horrid, but these here are just the ordinary household kind. Quite ordinary, but sheets, walls of them. I came into the little larder place near our sitting-room this morning. I thought they’d painted the walls black during the night. Then, at my taking the cover off some sugar, it was exactly as though the walls hovered and then fell inward breaking into black dust as they fell. They’ll cluster over a drop of wine on the table just like an evil black flower with grey petals. With one’s body they can play tricks beyond belief. They <em>laugh</em> at one, hovering at a distance, waiting. They watch one with their wicked little eyes⁠ ⁠… yes, I shall have to be careful about flies.</p>
				<p>I’ve had a headache all day, but then in the afternoon there was a thunderstorm hovering somewhere near and there was no work to do. I feel tired, too, and yet I can’t sleep. Later in the afternoon we were all sitting together, very quiet, not talking. I was thinking about Semyonov then. I wondered whether he felt her death. How had he taken it? Durward would tell me so little. I was so glad, all the same, that he wasn’t here. And yet, in the strangest way, I would like to have spoken to him, to have asked him, if I had dared, a little about her. He was the only man to whom she really gave herself. I don’t grudge him that⁠—but there’s so much that I want to know⁠—and yet I’d die rather than ask him. Die! That’s an old phrase now⁠—death would tell me much more than Semyonov ever could. Just when we were sitting there he came in. It was the most horrible shock. I don’t want to put it melodramatically but that was exactly what it was. I had been thinking of him, thinking even of speaking to him, but I had known at the time that he wasn’t here, that he couldn’t be here⁠—then there he was in the doorway⁠—square and solid and grave and scornful. Now the horrible thing is that the moment I realised him I felt afraid. I didn’t feel anger or hatred or fine desires for revenge⁠—anything like that⁠—simply a miserable contemptible fear. It seems that as soon as I climb out of one fear I tumble into another. They are not physical now, but <em>worse</em>!</p>
				<p><i>Later.</i> The last bit seems rather silly. But I’ll leave it.⁠ ⁠… As to Semyonov. Of course he was very quiet and scornful with all of us. He told Durward that he’d come to take his place and Durward went without a word, Semyonov went off then with Nikitin, looking about, and making suggestions! He changed some things but not very much. We had been pretty intimate, all of us, before he came. I had really felt this last day that Vladimir Stepanovitch and Andrey Vassilievitch were understood by me. Russians come and go so. At one moment they are close to you, intimate, openhearted, then suddenly they shut up, are miles away, look at you with distrust and suspicion. So with these two. On Semyonov’s arrival they changed absolutely. <em>He</em> shut them up of course. We were all as gloomy at supper as though we were deadly enemies. But the worst thing was at night. Durward and I had slept in one little room, Vladimir Stepanovitch and Andrey Vassilievitch in another. Of course Semyonov took Durward’s bed. There was nowhere else for him to go. I don’t know what he thought about it. Of course he said nothing. He talked a little about ordinary things and I answered stupidly as I always do with him. I hated the solemn way he undressed. He was a long time cleaning his teeth, making noises in his mouth as though he were laughing at me. Then he sat on his bed, naked except for his shirt, combing his moustache and beard very carefully with a pocket-comb. He was so thick and solid and scornful, not looking at me exactly, just staring in front of him. There was no sound except his comb scraping through his beard. The room was so small and he seemed absolutely to fill it, so that I felt really <em>flattened</em> against the wall. It was as though he were showing me deliberately how much finer a man he was than I, how much stronger his body, that he could do <em>anything</em> with me if he liked. He asked me, very politely, whether I’d mind blowing out the candle and I did it at once. He watched me as I walked across the floor and I felt ashamed of my thinness and my ugliness and <em>I know that he knew that I was ashamed</em>. After the light was blown out I heard him settle into his bed with a great heavy plop. I couldn’t sleep for a long time, and at every movement that he made I felt as though he were laughing at me. And yet with all this I had also the strangest impulse to get up, there in the dark, to walk across the room, to put my hand on his shoulder and to ask him about her. What would he do? He’d refuse to speak, I suppose. I should only get insulted⁠—and yet.⁠ ⁠… He must be thinking of her⁠—all the time just as I am. He must <em>want</em> to talk of her and I know her better than anyone else did. And perhaps if I once broke down his pride⁠ ⁠… and yet every time that his body moved and the bed creaked I felt that I hated him, that I never wanted to speak to him again, that.⁠ ⁠… Oh! but I’m ashamed of myself. He is right to despise me.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p><i>Saturday, July 31st.</i> It is just midnight. I am on duty tonight. Everything is quiet and there are not likely I think to be any more wounded until the morning. I am sitting in the room where they brought Marie. It’s strange to think of that, and when you’re sitting with a candle in a dark room you can imagine anything. It’s odd in this affair how little things affect one. There’s a book here, a “Report on New Mexico.” I looked at it idly the other day and now I’m forever picking it up. It always opens at the same page and I find myself thinking, speculating about it in a ridiculous manner. I shall throw the thing away to -morrow, but I know the page by heart anyway. It’s an account of the work of some school or other. Here are a few of the lectures that were given:</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fred. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bush. What the Community owes the Newspaper and what the Newspaper owes the Community.⁠—<abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. R.</abbr> Glass. Fools.⁠—<abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. T.</abbr> Cessna. Don’t Pay too dearly for the Whistle.⁠—<abbr>Prof.</abbr> Wellington Putman. Rip van Winkle.⁠—<abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. S.</abbr> Hanshaw. The Mind’s Picture Gallery.</p>
				<p>Then they acted <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Othello</i>⁠—The “Normal Students,” whoever they may be. Othello, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. F.</abbr> Dunlavey. Iago⁠—Douglas Giffard. Desdemona⁠—Carrie Whitehill. Emilia⁠—Gussie Rodgers.⁠ ⁠… Afterwards I see that Miss Gussie Rodgers gave a lecture on the Anglo-Saxon in Literature. She must have been a clever young woman. Then I see that they decorated one of their rooms with “a large number of carbon prints of celebrated paintings,” “the class picture being the most important and costing in the neighbourhood of $100⁠—this is the hunting scene of Ruysdael.⁠ ⁠…” Also they added to their Museum “manufactured articles from abroad illustrative of the habits and customs of foreigners.”</p>
				<p>Now isn’t that <em>all</em> incredible after the day that I’ve had? Where do the things join? What’s all <em>that</em> got to do with the horrors I’ve been through today, with the Forest, the cholera, Marie, Semyonov.⁠ ⁠… With <em>all</em> that’s happening in Europe? With this mad earthquake of a catastrophe? And yet one thinks of such silly things. I can see them doing <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Othello</i> with their cheap ermine, bad jewellery and impossible wigs. I expect Othello’s black came off as he got hotter and hotter; and the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. R.</abbr> Glass on “Fools”.⁠ ⁠… There’d be all the cheap morality⁠—“It’s better, my young friends, to be good than to be bad. It pays better in the end”⁠—and there’d be little stories, sentimental some of them and humorous some of them. There’d be a general titter of laughter at the humorous ones.⁠ ⁠… And the carbon prints, the “Ruysdael” always pointed out to visitors⁠ ⁠… and after the war it will all be going on again. At Polchester, too, they’ll be having cheap lectures in the Town-Hall and Shakespeare Readings and High-School Prize-givings.⁠ ⁠… <em>Where’s</em> the Connection between That and This? <em>Where’s</em> the permanent thing in us that goes on whatever life may do to us? Is life still beautiful and noble in spite of whatever man may do with it, or is Semyonov right and there is no meaning in my love for Marie, nothing real and true except the things we see with our eyes, hear with our ears? Is Semyonov right, or are Nikitin, Andrey Vassilievitch and I?⁠ ⁠… And now let me stick to facts. I left this morning about six with twenty wagons to fetch wounded. <em>Such</em> a wonderful summer morning⁠—the Forest quite incredibly beautiful, birds singing in thousands, and that strange little stream that runs near our house and can look so abominable when it pleases, was trembling and lovely as though it didn’t know what evil was. We got to the first Red Cross place about eight. Here was Krylov. What a good fellow! Always cheerful, always kindhearted, nothing can dismay him. A Russian type that’s common enough in spite of all the “profound pessimism of the Russian heart” that we’re always hearing of. There he was anyway, working like a butcher before a feast-day. Dirty looking barn they were working in and it smelt like hell. Cannon pretty close too. They say the Austrians are fearfully strong just here and of course our ammunition is climbing down to less than nothing⁠—looks as though we were going to have a hot time soon. I turned in and helped Krylov all the morning and somehow his fat, ugly face, his little exclamations, his explosive comical rages, his sudden rough kindnesses did one a world of good. We filled the wagons and sent them back, then about midday, under a blazing hot sun, we went on with the others. Is there any place in the globe hot and suffocating quite as this Forest is? Even in the open spaces one can’t breathe and there’s never any proper shade under the trees. At first we were at a loss, No one seemed quite to know where the Vengrovsky Polk were. I had to go on alone and reconnoitre. I was right out in the open then and more alone than one could believe. Cannon were blazing away and one battery seemed just behind me⁠—and yet I couldn’t see it. I could see nothing⁠—only great ridges of hills with the Forest like gigantic torrents of green water under the mist, and just at my feet cornfields <em>thick</em> with cornflowers. Then I saw rather a wonderful thing. I came to the edge of my hill and looked down into a cup of a valley, quite a little valley with the green waves towering on every side of it. Through the mist there shimmered below me a blue lake. I was puzzled⁠—there was no water here that I knew, but by this time the Forest has so bewitched my senses that I’m ready to believe anything of it. There it was, anyway, a blue lake, shifting a little under gold haze. I climbed down the hill a yard or two and then you can believe that I jumped! My blue lake was Austrian prisoners, nothing more nor less! Has anyone quite seen them like that before, I wonder, and isn’t this Forest really the old witch’s forest, able to do what it pleases with anything? There they were, hundreds of them, covering the whole floor of the little valley. I walked down into the middle of them, found an officer, asked him about wounded, and got directed some two versts in front of me. Then I climbed up the hill back to my wagons and we started off. We went down the hill round by the road and came to the prisoners, crossed a stream and plunged into a shining dazzling nightmare. <em>Where</em> the cannon were I don’t know⁠—all a considerable distance away, I suppose, because the only sign of shell were the little breaking puffs of smoke in the blue sky with just a pin-flash of light as they broke; but really amongst that welter of wooded hill the sounds were uncanny. They’d be under one’s feet, over one’s head, in one’s ear, up against one’s stomach, straight in the small of one’s back. Since my night with Nikitin physical fear really seems to have left me⁠—the whole outward paraphernalia of the war has become an entirely commonplace thing, but it was the Forest that I felt⁠—exactly as though it were playing with me. Wasn’t there an old medieval torture when they shot arrows at their victim, always just missing him, first on one side, then on another, until at last, tired of the game, they fixed him through the head? Well, that’s what the old beast was trying to do to me, <em>anything</em> to doubt what’s real and what is not, <em>anything</em> to make me question my senses.⁠ ⁠… We tumbled quite suddenly on to some men, a small Red Cross shelter and two or three hundred soldiers sitting under the trees by the road resting⁠—most of them sleeping. The doctor in the Red Cross place⁠—a small fussy man⁠—was ill-tempered and overworked. There were at least thirty dead men lying in a row outside the shelter, and the army sanitars were bringing in more wounded every minute. “Why weren’t there more wagons? What was the use of coming with so few? Where was the other doctor, someone or other who ought to have relieved him?” There he was, like a little monkey on wires, dancing up and down in the blazing road, his arms covered with blood, pincers in one hand and bandages in the other and the inside of his shelter with such a green, filthy smell coming out of it that you’d think the roof would burst! I filled seven of my wagons, sent them back and went forward with the remaining three. We were climbing now, up through the Forest road, the shell, very close, making a terrific noise, and in between the scream of the shell the birds singing like anything!</p>
				<p>The road turned the corner and then we <em>were</em> in the middle of it! Now <em>here’s</em> the worst thing I’ve seen with my eyes since I came to the war⁠—worst thing I shall ever see perhaps. One looks back, you know, to one of those old average afternoons at Polchester, my father coming back from golf, I myself going into the old red-walled garden for tea, with some novel under my arm, the cathedral bell ringing for Evensong just over the wall across the Green, then slowly dropping to its close, then the faint murmur of the organ. Some bird twittering in a tree overhead, buttered toast in a neat pile placed carefully over hot water to keep it warm; honey, heavy homemade cake, perhaps the local weekly paper with the “Do you know that⁠ ⁠…” column demanding one’s critical attention. One’s annoyed because tomorrow some tiresome fellow’s coming to luncheon, because one wishes to buy some china that one can’t afford, because the wife of the Precentor said to the Dean’s sister that young Trenchard would be an old man in a year or two.⁠ ⁠… One sips one’s tea, the organ leads the chants, the sun sinks below the wall.⁠ ⁠… That! This!⁠ ⁠… there’s the Forest road hot like red-hot iron under the sun; it winds away into the Forest, but so far as the eye can see it is covered with things that have been left by flying men⁠—<em>such</em> articles! Swords, daggers, rifles, cartridge-cases, of course, but also books, letters, a hairbrush, underclothes, newspapers, these tilings in thick, tangled profusion, rifles in heaps, cartridge-cases by the hundred! Under the sun up and down the road there are dead and dying, Russians and Austrians together. The Forest is both above and below the road and from out of it there comes a continual screaming. There is every note in this babel of voices, mad notes, plaintive notes, angry notes, whimpering notes. One wounded man is very slowly trying to drag himself across the road, and his foot which is nearly severed from his leg waggles behind him. One path that leads from the road to the Forest is piled with bodies and is a stream of blood. Some of the dead are lying very quietly in the ditch, their heads pillowed on their arms⁠—every now and then something that you had thought dead stirs.⁠ ⁠… And the screaming from the Forest is incessant so that you simply don’t hear the shell (now very close indeed).⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>There <em>is</em>, you know, that world somewhere with the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Someone lecturing on Fools and “the class ‘Ruysdael’ costing in the neighbourhood of $100.” At least, it’s very important if I’m to continue to keep my head steady that I should <em>know</em> that it is there!</p>
				<p>It seemed that we were the first Red Cross people to arrive. Oh! what rewards would I have offered for another ten wagons! How lamentably insufficient our three carts appeared standing there in the road with this screaming Forest on every side of one! As I waited there, overwhelmed by the blind indifference of the place, listening still to the incredible birds, seeing in the businesslike attentions of my sanitars only a further incredible indifference, a great stream of soldiers came up the road, passing into the first line of trenches, only a little deeper in the Forest. They were very hot, the perspiration dripping down their faces, but they went through to the position without a glance at the dead and wounded. No concern of <em>theirs</em>⁠—that. Life had changed; they had changed with it.⁠ ⁠… Meanwhile they did as they were told.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>We worked there, filling our wagons. The selection was a horrible difficulty. All the wounded were Austrians and how they begged not to be left! It would be many hours, perhaps, before the next Red Cross Division would appear. An awful business! One man dying in the wood tore at his stomach with an unceasing gesture and the air came through his mouth like gas screaming through an “escape” hole. One Austrian, quite an old man, died in my arms in the middle of the road. He was not conscious, but he fumbled for his prayerbook, which he gave me, muttering something. His name “Schneidher Gyorgy Pelmonoster” was written on the first page.</p>
				<p>We started for home at length. Our drive back was terrible. I find that I cannot linger any longer over this affair. Our carts drove over rough stones and ruts and we were four hours on the journey. Our wounded screamed all the way⁠—one man died.⁠ ⁠… My candle is nearly out. I must find another. In one of its frantic leaps just now I fancied that I saw Marie standing near the door. She looked just as she always did, very kind though smiling.⁠ ⁠… Of course it was only the candle. I must be careful not to encourage these fancies. But God! how lonely I am tonight! I realise, I suppose, that there isn’t one single living soul in the world who cares whether I die tonight or not⁠—not one. Durward will remember me, perhaps. No one else. And Marie would have cared. Yes, even married to Semyonov she would have cared⁠—and remembered. And I could always have cared for her, been her friend, as she asked me. I’m pretty low tonight. If I could sleep.⁠ ⁠… Boof!⁠ ⁠… There goes the candle!</p>
				<p><i>Wednesday, August 4th</i>.⁠ ⁠… I am growing accustomed, I suppose, to Semyonov’s company. After all, his contempt for me is an old thing, dating from the very first moment that he ever saw me. It has become now a commonplace to both of us. He is very silent now compared with the old days. There has been much work yesterday and today, but still last night I could not sleep. I think that he also did not sleep and we both lay there in the dark, thinking, I suppose, of the same thing. I thought even of myself, my sense of humour has never been very strong, but I can at any rate see that I am no very fine figure in life, and that whether such a man as I live or die can be of no great importance to anyone or anything, but I do most truly desire not to make more of the matter than is just. A man may have felt himself the most insignificant and useless of human creatures all his days, but face him with death and he becomes, by very force of the contrast, something of a figure.</p>
				<p>Here am I, deprived of the only thing in life that gave me joy or pride. I should, after that deprivation, have slipped back, I suppose, to my old life of hopeless uninterest and insignificance, but now here the death of Marie Ivanovna has been no check at all. I half believe now that one can do with life or death what one will. If I had known that from the beginning what things I might have found! As it is, I must simply make the best of it. Semyonov’s contempt would once have frightened the very life out of me, but after that night of his arrival here it has been nothing compared with the excitement of our relationship⁠—the things that are keeping us together in spite of ourselves and the strange changes, I do believe, that this situation here is making in him. The loss of Marie Ivanovna would two months ago perhaps have finished me. What is it now beside the wonder as to whether I have lost her after all, the consciousness of pursuit, the longing to <em>know</em>?⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Durward and I have spoken sometimes of my dream of the Forest. It must seem to him now, as to myself, strangely fulfilled; but I believe that if I catch the beast it will only be to discover that there is a further quest beyond, and then another maybe beyond that.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>At the same time there’s the practical question of one’s nerve. If this strain of work continues, if the hot weather lasts, and if I don’t sleep, I shall have to take care. Three times during the last three days I have fancied that I have seen Marie Ivanovna, once in broad daylight in the Forest, once sitting on the sofa in our room, once at night near my bed. Of course this is the merest illusion, but I have hours now when I am not quite sure of things. Andrey Vassilievitch told me something of the same today⁠—that he thought that he saw his wife and that Nikitin told him the same yesterday. The flies also are confusing and there’s a hot dry smell that’s disagreeable and prevents one from eating. I know that I must keep a clear head on these things. If only one could get away for an hour or two, right outside⁠—but one is shut up in this Forest as though it were a green oven.⁠ ⁠… I ought to be sleeping now instead of writing all this.⁠ ⁠… I must say that I had a curious illusion ten minutes ago while I was writing this, that one of the wounded, in a bed near the door which is open, began to slip, bed and all, across the floor towards me. He did indeed come closer and closer to me, the bed moving in jerks as though it were pushed. This was, of course, simply because my eyes were tired. When I try to sleep they are hot and smarting.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>I interrupt Trenchard’s diary to give a very brief account of the impression that was made on me by my visit to the three of them with some wagons four days after the date of the above entry. It must be remembered that I had not, of course, at this time read any of Trenchard’s diary, nor had I seen anything of him since the moment of Semyonov’s arrival. My chief impression during the interval had been my memory of Trenchard as I had last seen him, miserable, white-faced, unnerved. I had thought about him a good deal. Those days at the Otriad had been for the rest of us rather pleasantly tranquil. There was no question that we were relieved by the absence of Semyonov and Trenchard. Semyonov was no easy companion at any time and we had the very natural desire to throw off from us the weight of Marie Ivanovna’s unexpected death. I will not speak of myself in this matter, but for the others. She had not been very long in their company, she had been strange and unsettled in her behaviour, she had been engaged to a man, jilted him, and engaged herself to another⁠—all within a very short period of time. I, myself, was occupied incessantly by my thoughts of her, but that was my own affair. The past week then with us had been tranquil and easy. On my arrival at the “Point” in the Forest I was met at once by a new atmosphere. For one thing the war here was on the very top of us. Only a few yards away, towards the end of the garden, they were digging trenches. Somewhere beyond the windows, in the Forest, a battery had established itself near a clearing at the edge of a hill, the guns disguised with leaves and branches. Soldiers were moving incessantly to and fro. The house seemed full of wounded, wagons coming and going. They were digging graves in the garden, and sheeted bodies were lying in the orchard.</p>
				<p>My friends greeted me, seemed glad to see me for a moment, and then pursued their business. I was entirely outside their life. Only ten days before I had felt a closer intimacy with Trenchard, Andrey Vassilievitch and Nikitin than I had ever had with any of them. Now I simply did not exist for them. It was not the work that excluded me. The evening that passed then was an easy evening⁠—very little to do. We spent most of the night in playing chemin-de-fer. No, it was not the work. It was quite simply that something was happening to all of them in which I had no concern. They were all changed and about them all⁠—yes, even, I believe, about Semyonov⁠—there was an air of suppressed excitement, rather the excitement that schoolboys have, when they have prepared some secret forbidden defiance or adventure. Trenchard, whom I had left in the depths of a lethargic depression, was most curiously preoccupied. He looked at me first as though he did not perfectly remember me. He, assuredly, was not well. His eyes were lined heavily, his white cheeks had a flush of red that burnt there feverishly, and he seemed extraordinarily thin. He was restless, his eyes were never still, and I saw him sometimes fix them, in a strange way, upon some object as though he would assure himself that it was there. He was obviously under the influence of some deep excitement. He told me that he was sleeping badly, that his head ached, and that his eyes hurt him, but he did not seem distressed by these things. He was too strongly absorbed by something to be depressed. He treated me and everything around him with impatience, as though he could not wait for something that he was expecting.</p>
				<p>I have seen in this business of the war strange things that nerves can do with the human mind and body. I have seen many men who remain with their nerves as strong as steel from the first to the last, but this is, I should say, the exception and only to be found with men of a very unimaginative character. As regards Trenchard one must take into account his recent loss, the sudden stress of incessant exhausting work, the flaming weather and the constant com panionship of the one human being of all others most calculated to disturb his tranquillity. But in varying degrees I think that everyone in this place was at this time working under a strain of something abnormal and uncalculated. The very knowledge that the attack was now being pressed severely and that we had so little ammunition with which to reply, was enough to strain the nerves of everyone. Trenchard told me, in the course of the conversation, that I had with him during my second day’s stay, that his visit to the lines some days earlier (this is the visit of which he speaks in his diary) had greatly upset him. He had been disturbed apparently by the fact that there were not sufficient wagons. The whole sense of the Forest, he told me, was a strain to him, the feeling that he could not escape from it, the thought of its colour and heat and at the same time its ugliness and horror, the cholera scarecrow in it, and the deserted town and all the horrors of the recent attacks. The dead Austrians and Russians.⁠ ⁠… But I repeat, most emphatically, that he was not depressed by this. It was rather that he wished to keep his energies fresh and clear for some purpose of his own, and was therefore disturbed by anything that threatened his health. He was not quite well, he told me⁠—headaches, not sleeping⁠—but that “he had it well in control.”</p>
				<p>And here now is a strange thing. One of the chief purposes of my visit had been to persuade one of the four men to return with me to the Otriad. Molozov had asserted very emphatically that none of them should be compelled against their will to return to Mittövo, but he thought that it would be well if, considering the strain of the work and the Position, they were to take it in turns to have a day or two’s rest and so relieve one another. I had had no doubt that this would be very acceptable to them, but on my proposing it, was surprised to receive from each of them individually an abrupt refusal even to consider the matter. At the same time they assured me, severally, that the one or the other of them needed, very badly, a rest. After I had spoken, Nikitin, taking me aside, told me that he thought that Andrey Vassilievitch would be better at Mittövo. “He is a little in the way here,” he said. “Certainly he does his best, but this is not his place.” Nikitin wore the same preoccupied air as the others.⁠—“Whatever you do,” he said, “don’t let Andrey know that I spoke to you.” Andrey Vassilievitch, on his side with much nervousness and self-importance, told me that he thought that Nikitin was suffering from overwork and needed a complete rest. “You know, Ivan Andreievitch, he is really not at all well; I sleep in the same room. He talks in his sleep, fancies that he sees things⁠ ⁠… very odd⁠—although this hot weather⁠ ⁠… I myself for the matter of that⁠ ⁠…” and then he nervously broke off.</p>
				<p>But with all this they did not seem to quarrel with one another. It is true that I discovered a kind of impatience, especially between Andrey Vassilievitch and Nikitin, the kind of restlessness that you see sometimes between two horses which are harnessed together. Semyonov (he paid no attention to me at all during my visit) treated Trenchard quite decently, and I observed on several occasions his look of puzzled curiosity at the man⁠—a look to which I have alluded before. He spoke to him always in the tone of contemptuous banter that he had from the beginning used to him: “Well, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, I suppose that you couldn’t bring a big enough bandage however much you were asked to. But why choose the smallest possible.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Or, “That’s where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> writes his poetry⁠—being a nice romantic Englishman. Isn’t it, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>?”</p>
				<p>But I was greatly struck by Trenchard’s manner of taking these remarks. He behaved now as though he had secret reasons for knowing that he was in every way as good a man as Semyonov⁠—a better one, maybe. He laughed, or sometimes simply looked at his companion, or he would reply in his bad halting Russian with some jest at Semyonov’s expense.</p>
				<p>Finally, to end this business, if ever a man were affected to the heart by the loss of a friend or a lover, Semyonov was that man. He was a man too strong in himself and too contemptuous of weakness to show to all the world his hurt. I myself might have seen nothing had I not always before me the memory of that vision of his face between the trees. But from that I had proceeded⁠—</p>
				<p>It was, I suppose, the first time in his life that the fulfilment of his desire had been denied him. Had Marie Ivanovna lived, and had he attained with her his complete satisfaction, he would have tired of her perhaps as he had tired of many others, and have remained only the stronger cynic. But she had eluded him, eluded him at the very moment of her freshness and happiness and triumph. What defeat to his proud spirit was working now in him? What longing? What fierce determination to secure even now his ends? The change that I fancied in him was perhaps no more than his bracing of his strength and courage to face new conditions. Death had robbed him of his possession⁠—so much the worse then for Death!</p>
				<p>Upon this day of icy cold, as I write these words, I am afraid that my account may be taken as an extravagant and unjustified conceit. But that I do most honestly believe it not to be. I myself felt, during my two days’ stay in that place, the strangest contact with new experiences, new developments, new relationships. Normal life had been left utterly behind and there was nothing to remind one of it save perhaps that “Report on New Mexico” still there on the dusty table. But there was the heat; there were the wheeling, circling clouds of flies, now in lines, now in squares, now broken like smoke, now dim like vapour; there was that old familiar smell of dust and flesh, chemicals and blood; there were the men dying and broken, fighting like giants, defeating fears and terrors that hung like grey shadows about the doors and windows of the house.⁠ ⁠… Every incident and experience that we had had at the war, every incident and experience that I have related in these pages seemed to be gathered into this house.⁠ ⁠… As I look back upon it now it seems, without any extravagance at all, the very heart of the fortress of the enemy. I do not mean in the least that life was solemn or pretentious or heavy. It was careless, casual, as liable to the ridiculous intervention of unimportant things as ever it had been; but it was life pressed so close to the fine presence of Fate that you could hear the very beating of his heart. And <em>in</em> this Fortress it seemed to me that I, who was watching, outside the lives of these others, an observer only whom, perhaps, this same Fate despised, asked of God a sign. I saw suddenly here the connection, for which I had been waiting, between the four men: There they were, Nikitin and Andrey, Semyonov and Trenchard⁠—Two Wise Men and Two Fools⁠—surely the rivalry was ludicrous in its inequality⁠ ⁠… and yet God does not judge as men do. Nikitin and Semyonov or Andrey and Trenchard? Who would be taken and who left? I recalled Semyonov’s jesting words: “Even though it’s the wise men succeed in this world I don’t doubt it’s the fools have their way in the next.”</p>
				<p>I waited for my Sign.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Last of all I can hear it objected that everyone was surely too busy to attend to relationships or shades of relationships. But it was this very thing that contributed to the situation, namely, that, in the very stress of the work, there were hours, many hours, when there was simply nothing to be done. Then if one could not sleep times were bad indeed. Moreover, even in the throng of work itself one would be conscious of that slipping off from one of all the trappings of reality. One by one they would slip away and then, bewildered, one would doubt the evidence of one’s eyes, one’s brain, one’s ears, the fatigue hammering, hammering at one’s consciousness.⁠ ⁠… I have known what that kind of strain can be.</p>
				<p>I left on the second morning after my arrival and returned to Mittövo alone.</p>
				<p><i>Trenchard’s Diary. Tuesday, August 10.</i> Durward has been here for two days. He’s a good fellow but I seem rather to have lost touch with him during these last days. Then he’s rather bloodless⁠—a little more humour would cheer him up wonderfully. We’ve all been in mad spirits today as though we were drunk. The battery officers have got a gramophone that we turned on. We danced a bit although it’s hot as hell.⁠ ⁠… Then in the evening my spirits suddenly went; Andrey Vassilievitch gets on one’s nerves. His voice is tiresome and I’m tired of his wife. He tells me that he thinks he sees her at night. “Do I think it likely?” Silly little ass⁠—just the way to rot his nerves. Funny thing tonight. We were playing chemin-de-fer. Suddenly Semyonov said:</p>
				<p>“Supposing Molozov says that only one of us is to stay on here.” There was silence after that. We all four looked at one another. All I knew was nothing was going to move me away from this place if I could help it. Then Semyonov said:</p>
				<p>“Of course I would have to stay.”</p>
				<p>We went for him then. You should have heard Nikitin! I didn’t believe that he had it in him. Semyonov was quiet, of course, smiling that beastly smile of his.</p>
				<p>Then at last he said:</p>
				<p>“Suppose we play for it?”</p>
				<p>We agreed. The one who turned up the Ace of Hearts was to stay. You could have heard a pin drop after that. I have never before felt what I felt then. If I had to return and leave Semyonov here! They say that the attack may develop in this direction at any moment. If Semyonov were to be here and I not.⁠ ⁠… And yet what was it that I wanted? What I want is to be close to Marie again, to be there where Semyonov cannot reach us. I believe that she might always have cared for me if he had not been there. Whatever death may be, I must <em>know</em>.⁠ ⁠… If there is nothing more, no matter. If there <em>is</em> something more⁠—then there is something for her as well as for me and I shall find her, and I must find her alone. There’s nothing left in life now to me save that. As I sat there looking at the cards I knew all this, knew quite clearly that I must escape Semyonov. There’s no madness in this. Whilst he is there I’m nothing⁠—but without him, if I were with her again⁠—I was always beaten easily by anybody but in this at least I can be strong. I don’t hate him but I know that he will always be first as long as we’re together. And we seem to be tied now like dogs by their tails, tied by our thoughts of Marie.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Well, anyway I turned up the Ace. My heart seemed to jump right upside down when I saw it. The others said nothing. Only Semyonov at last:</p>
				<p>“Well, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, if it comes to it we’ll have to see that it’s necessary for <em>two</em> of us to be here. It will never do for you and me to be parted⁠—”</p>
				<p>Meanwhile, the firing’s very close tonight. They say the Austrians have taken Vulatch. Shocking, our lack of ammunition.⁠ ⁠… God! The heat!</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
