<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V: The Door Closes Behind Them</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Door Closes Behind Them</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<i>Trenchard’s Diary. Saturday, August 14th.⁠ ⁠…</i>
			</p>
			<p>Captain T⁠⸺ died this afternoon at four-thirty. A considerable shock to me. He was so young, so strong. They all said that he had a remarkable future. He had dined with us several times at Mittövo and his vitality had always attracted me; vitality restrained and drilled towards some definite purpose. He might have been a great man.⁠ ⁠… His wound in the stomach did not hurt him, I think. He was wonderfully calm at the last. How strange it is that at home death is so horrible with its long ceremonies, its crowd of relations, its gradual decay⁠—and here, in nine out of every ten deaths that I have seen there has been peace or even happiness. This is the merest truth and will be confirmed by any one who has worked here. Again and again I have seen that strange flash of surprised, almost startled interest, again and again I have been conscious⁠—<em>behind</em> not <em>in</em> the eyes⁠—of the expression of one who is startled by fresh conditions, a fine view, a sudden piece of news. This is no argument for religion, for any creed or dogma, I only say that here it is so, that Death seems to be happiness and the beginning of something new and unexpected.⁠ ⁠… I believe that even so hardy a cynic as Semyonov would support me in this. I and Semyonov were alone with young Captain T⁠⸺ when he died. Semyonov had liked the man and had done everything possible to save him. But he was absorbed by his death⁠—<em>absorbed</em> as though he would tear the secret of it from the body that looked suddenly so empty, and so meaningless.</p>
			<p>“Well, I’m glad he was happy,” he said to me. Then he stood, looking at me curiously. I returned the look. We neither of us said anything. These are all commonplaces, I suppose, that I am discovering. The only importance is that some ten million human beings are, in this war, making these discoveries for themselves, just as I am. Who can tell what that may mean? I have seen here no visions, nor have I met any one who has seen them, but there are undoubted facts⁠—not easy things to discount.</p>
			<p><i>Sunday, August 15.</i> Things are pretty bad here. The Austrians have taken Vulatch. Both on the right and on the left they have advanced. They may arrive here at any moment. The magnificence of the Russian soldier is surely beyond all praise. I wonder whether people in France and England realise that for the last three months here he has been fighting with one bullet as against ten. He stands in his trench practically unarmed against an enemy whose resources seem, endless⁠—but nothing can turn him back. Whatever advances the Germans may make I see Russia returning again and again. I do from the bottom of my soul, and, what is of more importance, from the sober witness of my eyes, here believe that nothing can stop the impetus born of her new spirit. This war is the beginning of a world history for her.</p>
			<p>Krylov this afternoon said that he thought that we should leave this place, get out our wagons and retire. But how can we? At this moment, how can we? We are just now at the most critical meeting of the ways⁠—the extra twelve versts back to Mittövo may make the whole difference to many of the cases, and the doctors of the Division, Krylov himself admits, have got their arms full. We simply can’t leave them.⁠ ⁠… There has been some confusion here. There doesn’t seem any responsible person to give us orders. Colonel Maximoff has forgotten us, I believe. In any case I think that we must stay on here for another day and night. Perhaps we shall get away to-morrow.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>I had a queer experience this afternoon. I don’t want to make too much of it but here it is. I went up to my room this afternoon at five to get some sleep, as I’m on duty to-night. I lay down and shut my eyes and then, of course, as I always do, immediately saw Marie Ivanovna. I know quite clearly that this present relationship to her cannot continue for long or I shall be off my head. I can see myself quite clearly as though I were outside myself, and I know that I’m madder now than I was a week ago. For instance in this business of Marie Ivanovna, I knew then that my seeing her was an illusion⁠—now I am not quite sure. I knew a week ago that I saw her because she is so much in my thoughts, because of the intolerable heat, because of the Flies and the Forest, because of Semyonov. I am not sure now whether it is not <em>her</em> wish that I should see her. She comes as she came on those last days before she left me⁠—with all the kindness in her eyes that no other human being has ever given me before, nor will ever give me again. To-day I looked and was not sure whether she were gone or no. I was not sure of several things in the room and as I lay there I said to myself, “Is that really a looking-glass or no?” “If I tried could I touch it or would it fade from under my hand?” The room was intolerably close and there was a fly who persecuted me. As I lay there he came and settled on my hand. He waited, watching me with his wicked sneering eyes, then he crept forward, and waited again, rubbing his legs one against the other. Then very slyly, laughing to himself, he began to tickle me. I slashed with my hand at him, he flew into the air, sneering, then with a little “ping” settled on the back of my neck. I vowed that I would not mind him; I lay still. He began then to crawl very slowly forward towards my chin, and it was as though he were dragging spidery strands of nerves through my body, fitting them all on to stiff, tight wires. He reached my chin, and then again, sneering up into my eyes, he began to tickle. I thought once more that I had him, but once again he was in the air. Then, after waiting until I had almost sunk back into sleep, he did the worst thing that a fly can do, began, very slowly, to crawl down the inside of my pince-nez (I had been trying to read). He got between the glass and my eyelash and moved very faintly with his damnable legs. Then my patience went⁠—I did what during these last days I have vowed not to do, lost my control, jumped from my bed, and cursed with rage.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Then with my head almost bursting with heat and my legs trembling I had an awful moment, I thought that I was really mad. I thought that I would get the looking-glass and smash it and that then I would jump from the window. In another moment I thought that something would break in my head, the something with which I kept control over myself⁠—I seemed to hear myself praying aloud: “Oh God! let me keep my reason! Oh God! let me keep my reason!” and I could see the Forest like a great green hot wave rising beyond the window to a towering height ready to leap down upon me.</p>
			<p>Then Semyonov came in. He stood in the doorway and looked at me. He must have thought me strange and I know that I waited, staring at him, feeling foolish as I always do with him. But he spoke to me kindly, with the sort of kindness that there is sometimes in his voice, patronising and reluctant of course.</p>
			<p>“You can’t sleep, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>?” he said.</p>
			<p>“No,” I answered, and said something about flies.</p>
			<p>“What have you been doing to the looking-glass?” he asked, laughing, for there the thing was on the floor, broken into pieces. I am sure that I never touched it.</p>
			<p>“That’s unlucky,” he said. “Never mind, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>,” he said smiling at me, “twenty-two misfortunes, aren’t you? Always dropping something,” he added quite kindly. “More, perhaps, than the rest of us.⁠ ⁠… Wash your face in cold water. It’s this infernal heat that worries us all.”</p>
			<p>I remember then that he poured the water into the blue tin basin for me and then, taking the tin mug himself, poured it in cupfuls over my hands and arms. I afterwards did the same for him. At that moment I very nearly spoke to him of Marie. I wished desperately to try; but I looked at his face, and his eyes, laughing at me as they always did, stopped me.</p>
			<p>When I had finished he thanked me, wiped his hands, then turning round at the door he said: “Why don’t you go back to Mittövo, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> ⸻ You’re tired out.”</p>
			<p>“You know why,” I answered, without looking at him He seemed then as though he would speak, but he stopped himself and went away. I lay down again and tried to sleep, but when I closed my eyes the green beyond the window burnt through my eyelids⁠—and then the fly (I am sure it was the same fly) returned.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p><i>Monday, August 16</i>.⁠ ⁠… Lord! but I am tired of this endless bandaging, cleaning of filthy wounds, paring away of ragged ends of flesh, smelling, breathing, drinking blood and dust and dirt. The poor fellows! Their bravery is beyond any word of mine. They have come these last few days with their eyes dazed and their ears deafened. Indeed the roaring of the cannon has been since yesterday afternoon incessant. They say that the Austrians are straining every nerve to break through to the river and cross. We are doing what we can to prevent them, but what can we do? There simply <strong>is not ammunition</strong>! The officers here are almost crying with despair, and the men know it and go on, with their cheerfulness, their obedience, their mild kindliness⁠—go into that green hell to be butchered, and come out of it again, if they are lucky, with their bodies mangled and twisted, and horror in their eyes. It’s nobody’s fault, I suppose, this business. How easy to write in the daily papers that the Germans prepared for war and that we did not, and that after a month or two all will be well.⁠ ⁠… After a month or two! tell that to us here stuck in this Forest and hear us how we laugh!⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, for the good of my health, I’m figuring very clearly to myself all the physical features of this place. It’s a long white house, two-storied. The front door has broken glass over it and there’s a litter of tumbled bricks on the top step. After you’ve gone through the front door you come into the hall where the wounded are as thick as flies. You go through the hall and turn to the left. There’s a pantry place on your right all full of flies and when you open the door they unsettle with a great buzz and shift into all sorts of shapes and patterns. Next to them is our sitting-room, the horrid place always dirty and stifling. Then there’s the operating-room, then another room for beds, then the kitchen. Outside to the right there’s the garden, dry now with the heat, and the orchard smells of the men they’ve buried in it. To the left, after a little clearing, there’s the forest always green and glittering. The men are in the trenches now, the new ones that were made last week, so I suppose that we shall be in the thick of it very shortly. That battery at the edge of the hill has been banging away all the morning. What else is there? There’s an old pump just outside the sitting-room window. There’s a litter of dirty paper and refuse there, too, that the flies gather round. There’s an old barn away to the right where some horses are and two cows. I have to keep my mind on these things because I know they’re real. You can touch them with your hands and they’ll still be there even if you go away⁠—they won’t walk with you as you move. So I must fasten on to these things about which there can’t be any doubt. In the same way I like to remember that book in the sitting-room⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Glass who lectured on “Fools,” the Ruysdael, and the Normal Pupils who acted <i>Othello</i>. They’re real enough and are probably somewhere now quietly studying, or teaching, or sleeping⁠—I envy them.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>A thing that happened this morning disturbed us all. Four soldiers came out of the Forest quite mad. They seemed rational enough at first and said that they’d been sent out of the first line trenches with contusion⁠—one of them had a bleeding finger, but the others were untouched. Then one of them, a middle-aged man with a black beard, began quite gravely to tell us that the Forest was moving. They had seen it with their own eyes. They had watched all the trees march slowly forward like columns of soldiers and soon the whole Forest would move and would crush every one in it. It was all very well fighting Austrians, but whole forests was more than any one could expect of them. Then suddenly one of them cried out, pointing with his finger: “See, Your Honour⁠—there it comes!⁠ ⁠… Ah! let us run! let us run!” One of them began to cry. It was very disagreeable. I saw Audrey Vassilievitch who was present glance anxiously through the window at the For est and then gravely check himself and look at me nervously to see whether I had noticed. The men afterwards fell into a strange kind of apathy. We sent them off to Mittövo in the afternoon.</p>
			<p>I want now to remember as exactly as possible a strange conversation I had this evening with Semyonov. I came up when it was getting dusk to the bedroom. One of the Austrian batteries was spitting away over the hill but we were not replying. Everything this afternoon has looked as though they were preparing for a heavy attack. Our little window was open and the sky beyond was a sort of very pale green, and against this you could see a flush of colour rising and falling like the opening and shutting of a door. Everything quite silent except the Austrian cannon and a soldier, delirious, downstairs, singing.</p>
			<p>The Forest was deep black, but you could see the soldiers’ fires gleaming here and there like beasts’ eyes. Our room was almost dark and I was very startled to find Semyonov sitting on his bed and staring in front of him. He looked like a wooden figure sitting there, and he didn’t move as I came in. I’m glad that although I’m still awkward and clumsy with him (as I am, and always will be, I suppose, with every one) I’m not afraid of him any more. The room was so dark that he looked like a shadow. I had intended to fetch something and go away, but instead of that I sat down on my bed, feeling suddenly very tired and lethargic.</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>,” he said in the ironical voice he always uses to me.</p>
			<p>(I would wish now to repeat if I can every word of our conversation.)</p>
			<p>“Krylov has been again,” I said. “He told Nikitin that we ought to go to-night. Nikitin asked him whether the Division had plenty of wagons and Krylov admitted that there weren’t nearly enough. He agreed that it would make a lot of difference if we could keep this place going until to-morrow night⁠—all the same he advised us to leave.”</p>
			<p>“We’ll stay until some one orders us to go,” said Semyonov. “It will make a difference to a hundred men or more probably. If they do start firing on to this place we can get the men off in the wagons in time.”</p>
			<p>“And what if the wagons have left for Mittövo?”</p>
			<p>“We’ll have to wait until they come back,” he answered.</p>
			<p>We sat there listening to the cannon. Then Semyonov said very quietly and not at all ironically, “I wish to ask you⁠—I have wished before⁠—tell me. You blame me for her death?”</p>
			<p>I thought for a moment, then I replied:</p>
			<p>“I did so at first. Now I do not think that it had anything to do with you or with me or with any one⁠—except herself.”</p>
			<p>“Except herself?” he said. “What do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“She wished it, I think.”</p>
			<p>His irony returned. “You believe in the power of others, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, too much. You should believe more in your own.”</p>
			<p>“I believe in her power. She was stronger than you,” I answered.</p>
			<p>“I’m sure that you like to think so,” he said laughing.</p>
			<p>“She is still stronger than you.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“So you are a mystic, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>,” he said. “Of course, with your romantic mind that is only natural. You believe, I suppose, that she is with us here in the room?”</p>
			<p>“It cannot be of interest to you,” I answered quietly, “what I believe.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is of interest,” he replied in a voice that was friendly and humorously indulgent, as though he spoke to a child. “I find it strange⁠—I have found it strange for many weeks now⁠—that I should think so frequently of you. You are not a man who would naturally be interesting to me. You are an Englishman and I am not interested in Englishmen. You are sentimental, you have no idea of life as it is, you like dull things, dull safe things, you believe always in what you are told. You have no sense of humour.⁠ ⁠… You should be of no interest to me, and yet during these last weeks I have not been able to get rid of you.”</p>
			<p>“That is not my fault,” I said. “I have not been so anxious for your company.”</p>
			<p>“No,” he said, speaking rather thoughtfully, as though he were seriously thinking something out, “you regard me, of course, as a very bad character. I have no desire to defend myself to you. But the point is that I have found myself often thinking of you, that I have even taken trouble sometimes to be with you.”</p>
			<p>He waited as though he expected me to say something, but I was silent.</p>
			<p>“It was perhaps that I saw that Marie Ivanovna cared for you. She gave you up to the end something that she never gave to me. That I suppose was tiresome to me.”</p>
			<p>“You thought you knew her,” I said, hoping to hurt him. “You did not know her at all.”</p>
			<p>“That may be,” he answered. “I certainly did not understand her, but that was attractive to me. And so, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, you thought that <em>you</em> understood her?”</p>
			<p>But I did not answer him. My head ached frantically, I was wretchedly in want of sleep. I jumped to my feet, standing in front of him:</p>
			<p>“Leave me alone! Leave me alone!” I cried. “Let us part. I am nothing to you⁠—you despise me and laugh at me⁠—you have from the first done so. It was because you laughed at me that she began to laugh. If you had not been there she might have continued to love me⁠—she was very inexperienced. And now that she is gone I am of no more importance to you⁠—let me be! For God’s sake, let me be!”</p>
			<p>“You are free,” he said. “You can return to Mittövo in an hour’s time when the wagons go.”</p>
			<p>I did not speak.</p>
			<p>“No, you will not go,” he went on, “because you think that she is here. She died here⁠—and you believe that she is not dead. I also will not go⁠—for my own reasons.”</p>
			<p>Then he jumped off his bed, stood upright against me, his clothes touching mine. He put his hand on my shoulder.</p>
			<p>“No, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, we will remain together. I find you really rather charming. And you are changed, you know. You are not the silly fool you were when you first came to us!”</p>
			<p>I moved away from him. I could not bear the touch of his hand on my shoulder. I had, I repeat, no fear of him. He might laugh at me or no as he pleased, but I did not want his kindness.</p>
			<p>“My beliefs seem to you the beliefs of a child,” I said, trying to speak more calmly. “Well, then, leave me to them. They at least do you no harm. I love her now as I loved her when I first saw her. I cannot believe that I shall never be with her again. But that is my own affair and matters to no one but myself!”</p>
			<p>He answered me: “You have a simple fashion of looking at things which I envy you. I assure you that I am not laughing at you. You believe, if I understand you, that after your death you will meet her again. You are afraid that if I die before you she will belong to me, but that if you die first you will be with her again as you were ‘at the beginning’?⁠ ⁠… Is not that so?”</p>
			<p>I did not answer him.</p>
			<p>“I swear to you,” he continued, “that I am not mocking you. What my own thoughts may be does not interest you, but I have not, in my life, found many things or persons that are worth one’s devotion, and she was worthy of being loved as you love her. Such days as these in such a place as this must bring strange thoughts to any man. When we return to Mittövo to-morrow night I assure you that you will see everything differently.”</p>
			<p>He felt, I suppose, that he had been speaking too seriously because the ironic humour with which he always treated me returned.</p>
			<p>“Here, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, at any rate we are. I’m sorry for you⁠—tiresome to be tied to some one as uncongenial as myself⁠—but be a little sorry for me, too. You’re not, you know, the ideal companion I would have chosen.”</p>
			<p>“Why did you come?” I asked him. “Durward was here⁠—we were doing very well⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Without me”⁠—he caught me up. “Yes, I suppose so. But your fascination is so strong that⁠—” He broke off laughing, then continued almost sharply: “Here we are anyway. To-night and to-morrow we are going to be lively enough if I know anything about it. I’ll do you the justice, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, of saying you’ve worked admirably here. I wouldn’t have believed it of you. Let us both of us drop our romantic fancies. We’ve no time to spare.” Then, turning at the door, he ended: “And you needn’t hate me so badly, you know. She cared for you in a way that she never gave <em>me</em>. Perhaps, after all, in the end, you will win⁠—”</p>
			<p>He gave me one last word:</p>
			<p>“All the same I don’t give her up to you,” he said.</p>
			<p>When I came downstairs again it was to find confusion and noise. In the first place little Andrey Vassilievitch was quarrelling loudly with Nikitin. He was speaking Russian very fast and I did not discover his complaint. There was something comic in the sight of his small body towering to a perfect tempest of rage, his plump hands gesticulating and always his eyes, anxious and self-important, doing their best to look after his dignity. Nikitin explained to me that he had been urging Andrey Vassilievitch to return to Mittövo with the wagons. “There’s no need,” he said, “for us all to stay. It’s only taking unnecessary risks⁠—and somebody should take charge of the wagons.”</p>
			<p>“There’s Feodor Constantinovitch,” said Andrey, naming a feldscher and stammering in his rage. “He’s re-responsible enough.” Then, seeing that he was creating something of a scene, he relapsed into a would-be dignified sulkiness, finally said he would not go, and strutted away.</p>
			<p>There were many other disturbances, men coming and going, one of the battery officers appearing for a moment dirty and dishevelled, and always the wounded drowsy or in delirium, watching with dull eyes the evening shadows, talking excitedly in their sleep. Semyonov called me to help in the operating room. Within the next two hours he had carried out two amputations with admirable cool composure. During the second one, when the man’s arm tumbled off into the basin and lay there amongst the filthy rags with the dirty white fingers curved, their nails dead and grey, I suddenly felt violently sick.</p>
			<p>A sanitar took my place and I went out into the cool of the forest, where a silver pattern of stars swung now above the branches and a full moon, red and cold, was rising be yond the hill. After a time I felt better and, finding that I was not needed for a time, I wrote this diary.</p>
			<p><i>Tuesday, August 17th.</i> It is just six o’clock⁠—a most lovely evening. Strangely enough everything is utterly quiet⁠—not a sound anywhere. You might fancy yourself in the depths of England somewhere. However, considering what has happened to-day and what they expect will happen now at any moment, the strain on our nerves is pretty severe, and as usual at such times I will fill in my diary. This is probably the last time that I write it here as we move as soon as the wagons return, which should be in about two hours from now.</p>
			<p>All our things are packed and I shall slip this book into my bag as soon as I have written this entry; but I have probably two or three hours clear for writing, as everything is ready for departure. Meanwhile I am wonderfully tranquil and at peace, able, too, to think clearly and rationally for the first time since Marie’s death. I want to give an account of the events since my last entry minutely and as truthfully as my memory allows me.</p>
			<p>At about half-past eleven last night Semyonov and I went up to our bedroom to sleep, Nikitin being on duty. There was not much noise, the cannon sounding a considerable distance away, but the flashlights and rockets against the night-sky were wonderful, and when we had blown out the candle our dark little room leapt up and down or turned round and round, the window flashing into vision and out again. Semyonov was almost immediately asleep, but I lay on my back and, of course, as usual, thought of Marie. My headache of the evening still raged furiously and I was in desperately low spirits. I had been able to eat nothing during the preceding day. I lay there half asleep, half awake, for, I suppose, a long time, hearing the window rat tle sometimes when the cannon was noisy and feeling under the jerky reflections on the wall as though I were in an old shambling cab driving along a dark road, I thought a good deal about that talk with Semyonov that I had. What a strange man! But then I do not understand him at all. I don’t think I understand any Russian, such a mixture of hardness and softness as they are, kind and then indifferent, cruel and then sentimental. But I understand people very little, and in all my years at Polchester there was never one single person whom I knew. Semyonov is perfectly right, I suppose, from his point of view to think me a fool. I lay there thinking of Semyonov. He was sleeping on his back, looking very big under the clothes, his beard square and stiff, lit up by the flashing light and then sinking into darkness again. I thought of him and of myself and of the strange contrast that we were, and how queer it was that the same woman should have cared for both of us. And I know that, although I did not hate him at all, I would give almost anything for him not to have been there, never to have been there. Whilst he was there I knew that I had no chance. Marie had not laughed at me during those days at Petrograd; she had believed in me then and I had been worth believing in. If people had believed in me more I might be a very different man now.</p>
			<p>I was almost asleep, scarcely conscious of the room, when suddenly I heard a voice cry, “Marie! Marie! Marie!” three times. It was a voice that I had never heard before, strong but also tender, full of pain, with a note in it too of a struggling self-control that would break in a moment and overwhelm its possessor. As I look back at it I remember that I felt the passion and strength in it so violently that I seemed to shrink into myself, as though I were witnessing something that no man should see, and as though also I were conscious of my own weakness and insignificance.</p>
			<p>It was Semyonov. The flashlight flashed into the room, shining for an instant upon him. He was sitting up in bed, his shirt open and his chest bare. His eyes were fixed upon the window, but he was fast asleep. He seemed to me a new man. I had grown so accustomed to his sarcasm, his irony, that I had almost persuaded myself that he had never truly loved Marie, but had felt some sensual attraction for her that would, by realisation, have been at once satisfied. This was another man. Here was a struggle, an agony that was not for such men as I.</p>
			<p>He cried again, “Marie! Marie!” then got up out of bed, walked on his naked feet in his shirt to the window, stood there and waited. The moonlight had, by this, struck our room and flooded it. He turned suddenly and faced me. I could not believe that he did not see me, but I could not endure the unhappiness in his eyes and I turned, looking down. I did not look at him again but I heard his feet patter back to the bed; then he stood there, his whole body strung to meet some overmastering crisis. He whispered her name as though she had come to him since his first call. “Ah, Marie, my darling,” he whispered.</p>
			<p>I could not bear that. I crept from my bed, slipped away, closed the door softly behind me and stole downstairs.</p>
			<p>I cannot write at length of what followed. It was the crisis of everything that has happened to me since I left Petrograd. Every experience that I had had was suddenly flung into this moment. I was in our sitting-room now, pitch dark because shutters had been placed outside the windows to guard against bullets. I stood there in my shirt and drawers: shuddering, shivering with hatred of myself, shivering with fear of Semyonov, shivering above all, with a desperate, agonising, torturing hunger for Marie. Semyonov’s voice had appalled me. I hadn’t realised before how strongly I had relied on his not truly caring for her. Everything in the man had seemed to persuade me of this, and I had even flattered myself on my miserable superiority to him, that I was the true faithful lover and he the vulgar sensualist. How small now I seemed beside him!⁠—and how I feared him! Then I was at sudden fierce grip with the beast!⁠ ⁠… At grips at last!</p>
			<p>I had once before, on another night, been tempted to kill myself, but that had been nothing to this. Now sick and ill, faint for food, I swayed there on the floor, hearing always in my ear⁠—“Give way! Give way!⁠ ⁠… You’ll be in front of him, you’ll have left him behind you, he can do nothing⁠ ⁠… a moment more and you can be with her⁠—and he cannot reach you!”</p>
			<p>I do not know how long I fought there. I was not fighting with an evil devil, a fearful beast as in my dreams I had always imagined it⁠—I was fighting myself: every weakness in the past to which I had ever surrendered, every little scrap of personal history, every slackness and cowardice and lethargy was there on the floor against me.</p>
			<p>I don’t know what it was that prevented me stealing back to my room, fetching my revolver and so ending it. I could see Marie close to me, to be reached by the stretching of a finger. I could see myself living on, always conscious of Semyonov, his thick beastly confident body always there between myself and her.</p>
			<p>I sank into the last depths of self-despair and degradation. No fine thing saved me, no help from noble principles, nothing fine. The whole was as sordid as possible. I knew, even as I struggled, that I was a silly figure there, with my bony ugliness, in my shirt and drawers, my hair on end and my teeth chattering. But I responded, I suppose, to some little pulse of manly obstinacy that beat somewhere in me. I would <em>not</em> be beaten by the Creature. Even in the middle of it I realised that this was the hardest tussle of my life and worth fighting. I know too that some thought of Nikitin came to me as though, in some way, my failure would damage <em>him</em>. I remembered that night of the Retreat when he had helped me and, as though he were appealing visibly to me there in the room, I responded; I seemed to feel that he was fighting some battle of his own and that my victory would fortify him. I stood with him beside me. So I fought it, fought it with the sweat dripping down my nose and my tongue dry. “No!” something suddenly cried in me. “If she’s his, she’s his⁠—I will not take her this way!”⁠—then in a snivelling, miserable fashion I began to cry, simply from exhaustion and nerves and headache. I slipped down into a chair. I sat there feeling utterly beaten and yet in some dim way, as one hears a trumpet sounding behind a range of hills, I was triumphant. There with my head on the table and my nose, I believe, in a plate left from some one’s last night’s supper, I slept a heavy, dreamless sleep.</p>
			<p>I woke and heard a clock in the room strike three. I got up, stretched my arms, yawned and knew that my head was clear and my brain at peace. I can’t describe my feelings better than by saying that it was as though I had put my brain and my heart and all my fears and terrors under a good stiff pump of cold water. I felt a different man from four hours before, although still desperately tired and physically weak.</p>
			<p>I went softly upstairs. The light of a most lovely summer morning flooded the room. Semyonov was lying, sleep ing like a child, his head pillowed on his arm. Very cautiously I dressed, then went downstairs again. I did not understand now⁠—the peace and happiness in my heart. All the time I was saying to myself: “Why am I so happy? Why am I so happy?”⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>The world was marvellously fresh, with little white glittering clouds above the trees, the grass wet and shining, and the sky a high dome of blue light, like the inside of a glass bell that has the sun behind it. Here and there on the outskirts of the Forest fires were still dimly burning, pale and dim yellow shadows beneath the sun. Men wrapped in their coats were sleeping in little groups under the trees. Horses cropped at the grass; soldiers were moving with buckets of water. Two men, at the very edge of the Forest, stripped to the waist, were washing in a pool that was like a blue handkerchief in the great forest of green. I found a little glade, very bright and fresh, under a group of silver birch, and there I lay down on my back, my hands behind my head, looking up into the little dancing atoms of blue between the trees and the golden stars of sunlight that flashed and sparkled there.</p>
			<p>Happiness and peace wrapped me round. I cannot pretend to disentangle and produce in proper sequence all the thoughts and memories that floated into my vision and away again, but I know that whereas before thoughts had attacked me as though they were foul animals biting at my brain, now I seemed myself gently to invite my memories.</p>
			<p>Many scenes from my Polchester days that I had long forgotten came back to me. I was indeed startled by the clearness with which I saw that earlier figure⁠—the very awkward, careless, ugly boy, listening lazily to other people’s plans, taking shelter from life under a vague love of beauty and an idle imagination; the man, awkward and ugly, sensitive because of his own self-consciousness, wasting his hours through his own self-contempt which paralysed all effort, still trusting to his idle love of beauty to pull him through to some superior standard, complaining of life, but never trying to get the better of it; then the man who came to Russia at the beginning of the war, still self-centred, always given up to timid self-analysis, but responding now a little to the new scenes, the new temperament, the new chances. Then this man, feeling that at last he was rid of all the tiresome encumbrances of the earlier years, lets himself go, falls in love, worships, dreams for a few days a wonderful dream⁠—then for the first time in his life, begins to fight.</p>
			<p>I saw all the steps so clearly and I saw every little thought, every little action, every little opportunity missed or taken, accumulating until the moment of climax four hours before. I seemed to have brought Polchester on my back to the war, and I could see quite clearly how each of us⁠—Marie, Semyonov, Nikitin, Durward, every one of us⁠—had brought <em>their</em> private histories and scenes with <em>them</em>. War is made up, I believe, not of shells and bullets, not of German defeats and victories, Russian triumphs or surrenders, English and French battles by sea and land, not of smoke and wounds and blood, but of a million million past thoughts, past scenes, streets of little country towns, lonely hills, dark sheltered valleys, the wide space of the sea, the crowded traffic of New York, London, Berlin, yes, and of smaller things than that, of little quarrels, of dances at Christmas time, of walks at night, of dressing for dinner, of waking in the morning, of meeting old friends, of sicknesses, theatres, church services, prostitutes, slums, cricket-matches, children, rides on a tram, baths on a hot morn ing, sudden unpleasant truth from a friend, momentary consciousness of God.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Death too.⁠ ⁠… How clear now it was to me! During these weeks I had wondered, pursued the thought of Death. Was it this? Was it that? Was it pain? Was it terror? I had feared it, as for instance when I had seen the dead bodies in the Forest, or stood under the rain at Nijnieff. I had laughed at it as when I had gone with the sanitars. I had cursed it as when Marie Ivanovna had died. I had sought it as I had done last night⁠—and always, as I drew closer and closer to it, fancied it some fine allegorical figure, something terrible, appalling, devastating.⁠ ⁠… How, when I was, as I believed, at last face to face with it, I saw that one was simply face to face with oneself.</p>
			<p>Four hours I have been writing, and no sign of the wagons.⁠ ⁠… I am writing everything down as I remember it, because these things are so clear to me now and yet I know that afterwards they will be changed, twisted.</p>
			<p>I was drowsy. I saw Polchester High Street, Garth in Roselands, Clinton, Truxe, best of all Rafiel. I went down the high white hill, deep into the valley, then along the road beside the stream where the houses begin, the hideous Wesleyan Chapel on my right, “Ebenezer Villa” on my left, then the cottages with the gardens, then the little street, the post-office, the butcher’s, the turn of the road and, suddenly, the bay with the fishing boats riding at anchor and beyond the sea.⁠ ⁠… England and Russia! to their strong and confident union I thought that I would give every drop of my blood, every beat of my heart, and as I lay there I seemed to see on one side the deep green lanes at Rafiel and on the other the shining canals, the little wooden houses, the cobbler and the tufted trees of Petrograd, the sea coast beyond Truxe and the wide snow-covered plains beyond Moscow, the cathedral at Polchester and the Kremlin, breeding their children, to the hundredth generation, for the same hopes, the same beliefs, the same desires.</p>
			<p>I slept in the sun and had happy dreams.</p>
			<p>I have re-read these last pages and I find some very fine stuff about⁠—“giving every drop of blood,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Of course I am not that kind of man. Men, like Durward and myself⁠—he resembles me in many ways, although he is stronger than I am, and doesn’t care what people think of him⁠—are too analytical and self-critical to give much of their blood to anybody or to make their blood of very much value if they did.</p>
			<p>I only meant that I would do my best.</p>
			<p>Later in the morning the firing began again pretty close. Andrey Vassilievitch came to me and wanted to talk to me. I was rather short with him because I was busy. He wanted to tell me that he hoped I hadn’t misunderstood his quarrel with Nikitin last night. It had been nothing at all. His nerves had been rather out of order. He was very much better to-day, felt quite another man. He <em>looked</em> another man and I said so. He said that I did.⁠ ⁠… Strange, but I felt as I looked at him that he was sickening for some bad illness. One feels that sometimes about people without being able to name a cause.</p>
			<p>I have an affection for the little man⁠—but he’s an awful fool. Well, so am I. But fools never respect fools.⁠ ⁠… Strange to see Semyonov. I had expected him for some reason to be different to-day. Just the same, of course, very sarcastic to me. I had a hole in one of my pockets and was always forgetting and putting money and things into it. This seemed to annoy him. But to-day nothing matters. Even the flies do not worry me. All the morning Marie has seemed so close to me. I have a strange excite ment, the feeling that one has when one is in a train that approaches the place where some one whom one loves is waiting.⁠ ⁠… I feel exactly as though I were going on a journey.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Since three o’clock we’ve had a lively time. The attack began about five minutes to three, by a shell splashing into the Forest near our battery. No one killed, fortunately. They’ve simply stormed away since then. I don’t seem to be able to realise it and have been sitting in my room writing as though they were a hundred miles away. One so used to the noise. Everything is ready. We’ve got all the wounded prepared. If only the wagons would come.⁠ ⁠… Hallo! a shell in the garden⁠—cracked one of these windows. I must go down to see whether any one’s touched.⁠ ⁠… I put this in my bag. To-morrow⁠ ⁠… and I am so happy that⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The end of Trenchard’s diary.</p>
			<p>These are the last words in Trenchard’s journal. It fills about half the second exercise book. The last pages are written in a hand very much clearer and steadier than the earlier ones.</p>
			<p>I would like now to make my account as brief as possible.</p>
			<p>Upon the afternoon of August 16 we were all at Mittövo, extremely anxious about our friends. Molozov was in a great state of alarm. The sanitars with the wagons that arrived at about four o’clock in the afternoon told us that a violent attack in the intermediate neighbourhood of our white house was expected at any moment. The wagons were to return as quickly as possible, and bring every one away. They left about five o’clock in charge of Molozov and Goga, who were bursting with excitement. I knew that they could not be with us again until at any rate nine o’clock, but I was so nervous that at about seven I walked out to the cross and watched.</p>
			<p>It was a very dark night, but the sky was simply on fire with searchlights and rockets, very fine behind the Forest and reflected in the river. The cannonade was incessant but one could not tell how close it was. At last, at about half-past eight, I could endure my ignorance no longer and I went down the hill towards the bridge. I had not been there more than ten minutes and had just seen a shell burst with a magnificent spurt of fire high in the wood opposite, when our wagons suddenly clattered up out of the darkness. I saw at once that something was wrong. The horses were being driven furiously although there was now no need, as I thought, for haste. I could just see Semyonov in the half light and he shouted something to me. I caught one of the wagons as it passed and nearly crushed Goga.</p>
			<p>We were making so much noise that I had to shout to him.</p>
			<p>“Well?” I cried.</p>
			<p>Then I saw that he was crying, his arms folded about his face, sobbing like a little boy.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” I shouted.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr>.⁠ ⁠…” he said, “Andrey Vassilievitch.⁠ ⁠…” I looked round. One of the sanitars nodded.</p>
			<p>Then there followed a nightmare of which I can remember very little. It seems that at about four in the afternoon the Austrians made a furious attack. At about seven our men retreated and broke. They were gradually beaten back towards the river. Then, out of Mittövo, the “Moskovsky Polk” made a magnificent counter-attack, rallied the other Division and finally drove the Austrians right back to their original trenches. From nine o’clock until twelve we were in the thick of it. After midnight all was quiet again. I will not give you details of our experiences as they are not all to my present purpose.</p>
			<p>At about half-past one in the morning I found Nikitin standing in the garden, looking in front of him across the river, over which a very faint light was beginning to break.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>I touched him on the arm and he started, as though he had been very far away.</p>
			<p>“How did Trenchard die?”</p>
			<p>He answered at once, very readily: “About three o’clock the shells were close. The wagons arrived a little before seven so we had fully four anxious hours. We had had everything ready all the afternoon and, of course, just then we couldn’t go out to fetch the wounded and I think that the army sanitars were working in another direction, so that we had nothing to do⁠—which was pretty trying. I didn’t see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> until just before seven. He had been busy upstairs about something and then at the sound of the wagons he came out. I had noticed that all day he had seemed very much quieter and more cheerful. He had been in a wretched condition on the earlier days, nervous and over-strained, and I was very glad to see him so much better. We were all working then, moving the wounded from the house to the wagons. We couldn’t hear one another speak, the noise was so terrific. Andrey and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> were directing the sanitars near the house. Semyonov and I were near the wagons. I had looked up and shouted something to Andrey when suddenly I heard a shell that seemed as though it would break right over me. I braced myself, as one does, to meet it. For a moment I heard nothing but the noise; my nostrils were choked with the smell and my eyes blinded with dust. But I knew that I had not been hit, and I stood there, rather stupidly, wondering. Then cleared. I saw that all the right corner of the house was gone, and that Semyonov had run forward and was kneeling on the ground. With all the shouting and firing it was very difficult to realise anything. I ran to Semyonov. Andrey⁠ ⁠… but I won’t⁠ ⁠… I can’t⁠ ⁠… he must have been right under the thing and was blown to pieces. <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, strangely enough, lying there with his arms spread out, seemed to have been scarcely touched. But I saw at once when I came to him that he had only a few moments to live, He had a terrible stomach wound but was suffering no pain, I think. Semyonov was kneeling, with his arm behind his head, looking straight into his eyes.</p>
			<p>“ ‘<abbr>Mr.</abbr>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>,’ he said several times, as though he wanted to rouse him to consciousness. Then, quite suddenly, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> seemed to realise. He looked at Semyonov and smiled, one of those rather timid, shy smiles that were so customary with him. His eyes though were not timid. They were filled with the strangest look of triumph and expectation.</p>
			<p>“The two men looked at one another and I, seeing that nothing was to be done, waited. Semyonov then, speaking as though he and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> were alone in all this world of noise and confusion, said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘You’ve won, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>.⁠ ⁠… You’ve won!’ He repeated this several times as though it was of the utmost importance that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> should realise his words.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr>, smiling, looked at Semyonov, gave a little sigh, and died.</p>
			<p>“I can hear now the tones of Semyonov’s voice. There was something so strange in its mixture of irony, bitterness and kindness⁠—just that rather contemptible, patronising kindness that is so especially his.</p>
			<p>“We had no time to wait after that. We got the wagons out by a miracle without losing a man. Semyonov was marvellous in his self-control and coolness.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>We were both silent for a long time. Nikitin only once again. “Andrey!⁠ ⁠… My God, how I will miss him!” he said⁠—and I, who knew how often he had cursed the little man and been impatient with his importunities, understood. “I have lost more⁠—far more⁠—than Andrey,” he said. “I talked to you once, Ivan Andreievitch. You will understand that I have no one now who can bring her to me. I think that she will never come to me alone. I never needed her as he did, No more dreams.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>We were interrupted by Semyonov, who, carrying a lantern, passed us. He saw us and turned back.</p>
			<p>“We must be ready by seven,” he said sharply. “A general retirement. Ivan Andreievitch, do you know whether <abbr>Mr.</abbr> had friends or relations to whom we can write?”</p>
			<p>“I heard of nobody,” I answered.</p>
			<p>“Nobody?”</p>
			<p>“Nobody.”</p>
			<p>Just before he turned my eyes met his. He appeared to me as a man who, with all his self-control, was compelling himself to meet the onset of an immeasurable devastating loss.</p>
			<p>He gave us a careless nod and vanished into the darkness.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
