<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">First Move to the Enemy</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was during two nights in the forest of S⁠⸺, about which I must afterwards write, that I had those long conversations with Trenchard, upon whose evidence now I must very largely depend. Before me as I write is his Diary, left to me by him. In this whole business of the war there is nothing more difficult than the varied and confused succession with which moods, impressions, fancies, succeed one upon another, but Trenchard told me so simply and yet so graphically of the events of these weeks that followed the battle of S⁠⸺ that I believe I am departing in no way from the truth in my present account, the truth, at any rate as he himself believed it to be.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>The only impression that he brought away with him from the battle of S⁠⸺ was that picture, lighted by the horizon fires, of Marie Ivanovna kneeling with her hand on Semyonov’s shoulder. That, every detail and colour of it, bit into his brain.</p>
			<p>In understanding him it is of the first importance to remember that this was the one and only love business of his life. The effect of those days in Petrograd when Marie Ivanovna had shown him that she liked him, the thundering stupefying effect of that night when she had accepted his love, must have caught his soul and changed it as glass is caught by the worker and blown into shape and colour. There he was, fashioned and purified, ready for her use. What would she make of him? That she should make nothing of him at all was as incredible to him as that there should not be, somewhere in the world, Polchester town in Glebeshire county.</p>
			<p>There had been with him, I think, from the first a fear that “it was all too good to be true”⁠—<i xml:lang="la">Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes.</i> It is not easy for any man, after thirty years’ shy shrinking from the world, to shake himself free of superstitions, and such terrors the quiet and retired Polchester had bred in Trenchard’s heart as though it had been the very epitome of life at its lowest and vilest. It simply came to this, that he refused to believe that Marie Ivanovna had been given to him only to be taken away again. About women he knew simply nothing and Russian women are not the least complicated of their sex. About Marie Ivanovna he of course knew nothing at all.</p>
			<p>His first weeks in our Otriad had been like the painful return to drab reality after a splendid dream. “After all I am the hopeless creature I thought I was. What was there, in those days in Petrograd, that could blind me?” His shyness returned, his awkwardness, his mistakes in tact and resource were upon him again like a suit of badly made clothes. He knew this but he believed that it could make no difference to his lady. So sure was he of himself in regard to her⁠—she might be transformed into anything hideous or vile and still now he would love her⁠—that he could not believe that she would change. The love that had come to them was surely eternal⁠—it must be, it must be, it must be.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He failed altogether to understand her youth, her inexperience, above all her coloured romantic fancy. Her romantic fancy had made him in her eyes for a brief hour something that he was not. After a month at the war I believe that she had grown into a woman. She had loved him for an instant as a young girl loves a hero of a novel. And although she was now a woman she must still keep her romantic fancy. He was no longer part of that⁠—only a clumsy man at whom people laughed. She must, I think, have suffered at her own awakening, for she was honest, impetuous, pure, if ever woman was those things.</p>
			<p>He did not see her as she was⁠—he still clung to his confidence; but he began as the days advanced to be terribly afraid. His fears centred themselves round Semyonov. Semyonov must have seemed to him an awful figure, powerful, contemptuous, all-conquering. Any blunders that he committed were doubled by Semyonov’s presence. He could do nothing right if Semyonov were there. He was only too ready to believe that Semyonov knew the world and he did not, and if Semyonov thought him a fool⁠—it was quite obvious what Semyonov thought him⁠—then a fool he must be. He clung desperately to the hope that there would be a battle⁠—a romantic dramatic battle⁠—and that in it he would most gloriously distinguish himself. He believed that, for her sake, he would face all the terrors of hell. The battle came and there were no terrors of hell⁠—only sick headache, noise, men desperately wounded, and, once again, his own clumsiness. Then, in that final picture of Marie Ivanovna and Semyonov he saw his own most miserable exclusion.</p>
			<p>In the days that followed there was much work and he was forgotten. He assisted in the bandaging-room; in later days he was to prove most efficient and capable, but at first he was shy and nervous and Semyonov, who seemed always to be present, did not spare him.</p>
			<p>Then, quite suddenly, Marie Ivanovna changed. She was kinder to him than she had ever been, yes, kinder than during those early days in Petrograd. We all noticed the change in her. When she was with him in the bandaging-room she whispered advice to him, helped him when she had a free moment, laughed with him, put him, of course, into a heaven of delight. How happy at once he was! His clumsiness instantly fell away from him, he only smiled when Semyonov sneered, his Russian improved in a remarkable manner. She was tender to him as though she were much older than he. He has told me that, in spite of his joy, that tenderness alarmed him. Also when he kissed her she drew back a little⁠—and she did not reply when he spoke of their marriage.</p>
			<p>But for four days he was happy! He used to sing to himself as he walked about the house in a high cracked voice⁠—one song <em>I did but see her passing by</em>⁠—another <em>Early one morning</em>⁠—I can hear him now, his voice breaking always on the high notes.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Early one morning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as the sun was rising</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard a maid singing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the valley below:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah! don’t deceive me! Pray never leave me,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How could you treat a poor maiden so!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>His pockets were more full than ever of knives and string and buttons. His smile when he was happy lightened his face, changing the lines of it, making it if not handsome pleasant and friendly. He would talk to himself in English, ruffling his hands through his hair: “And then, at three o’clock I must go with Andrey Vassilievitch⁠ ⁠…” or “I wonder whether she’ll mind if I ask⁠—” He had a large briar pipe at which he puffed furiously, but could not smoke without an endless procession of matches that afterwards littered the floor around him. “The tobacco’s damp,” he explained to us a hundred times. “It’s better damp.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Then, quite suddenly, the blow fell.</p>
			<p>One evening, as they were standing alone together in the yard watching the yellow sky die into dusk, without any preparation, she spoke to him.</p>
			<p>“John,” she said, “I can’t marry you.”</p>
			<p>He heard her as though she had spoken to another man. It was as though he said: “Ah, that will be bad news for so-and-so.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand,” he said, and instantly afterwards his heart began to beat like a raging beast and his knees trembled.</p>
			<p>“I can’t marry you,” she told him, “because I don’t love you. Ah, I’ve known it a long time⁠—ever since we left Petrograd. I’ve often, often wanted to tell you⁠ ⁠… I’ve been afraid.”</p>
			<p>“You can’t marry me?” he repeated, “But you must.⁠ ⁠…” Then hurriedly: “No, I shouldn’t say that. You must forgive me⁠ ⁠… you have confused me.”</p>
			<p>“I’m very unhappy⁠ ⁠… I’ve been unhappy a long time. It was a mistake in Petrograd. I don’t love you⁠—but it isn’t only that.⁠ ⁠… You wouldn’t be happy with me. You think now⁠ ⁠… but it’s a mistake.”</p>
			<p>He has told me that as the idea worked through to his brain his only thought was that he must keep her at all costs, under any conditions, keep her.</p>
			<p>“You can’t⁠—you mustn’t,” he whispered, staring as though he would hold her by her eyes. “Don’t you see that you mustn’t? What am I to do after all this? What are we both to do? It’s breaking everything. I shan’t believe in anything if you.⁠ ⁠… Ah! but no, you don’t really mean anything.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He saw that she was trembling and he bent forward, put his arm very gently round her as though he would protect her.</p>
			<p>But she very strongly drew away from him, looked him in the face, then dropped her eyes, let her whole body droop as though she were most bitterly ashamed.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” she said, “what I’ve been⁠ ⁠… what I’ve done. During these last weeks I’ve been terrible to myself⁠—and yet it’s better too. I didn’t live a real life before, and now I see things as they are. I don’t love you, John, and so we mustn’t marry.”</p>
			<p>He looked at her and then suddenly wild, furious, shouting at her:</p>
			<p>“You mustn’t.⁠ ⁠… You dare not.⁠ ⁠… Then go if you wish. I don’t want you, do you hear?⁠ ⁠… I don’t want.⁠ ⁠… I don’t want you!”</p>
			<p>She turned and walked swiftly into the house. He watched her go, then with quick stumbling steps hurried into the field below the farm.</p>
			<p>There he stood, thinking of nothing, knowing nothing, seeing nothing. The dusk came up, there had been rain during the day, the mist was in grey sheets, the wet dank smell of the earth and of the vegetables amongst which he stood grew stronger as the light faded. He thought of nothing, nothing at all. He felt in his pocket for his pipe, something dropped⁠—and he knelt down there on the soaking ground, searching. He searched furiously, raging to himself again and again: “Oh! I must find it! I must find it! I must find it!” His hands tore the wet vegetables, were thick with the soil. Other things fell from his pockets, Then the rain began to descend again, thin and cold. In some building he could hear a horse moving, stamping. He pulled up the vegetables by their roots in his search. As though a sword had struck him his brain was clear. He knew of his loss. He flung himself on the ground, rubbing the wet soil on to his face, whispering desperately: “Oh God!⁠—Oh God!⁠—Oh God!”</p>
			<p>On the day following we did not know of what had happened. Trenchard was not with us, as he was sent about midday with some sanitars to bury the dead in a wood five miles from M⁠⸺. That must have been, in many ways, the most terrible day of his life and during it, for the first time, he was to know that unreality that comes to every one, sooner or later, at the war. It is an unreality that is the more terrible because it selects from reality details that cannot be denied, selects them without transformation, saying to his victim: “These things are as you have always seen them, therefore this world is as you have always seen it. It is real, I tell you.” Let that false reality be admitted and there is no more peace.</p>
			<p>On this day there were the two sanitars, whose faces now he knew, walking solidly beside his cart, there were the little orchards with the soldiers’ tents sheltering beneath them, the villages with the old men, the women, the children, watching, like ghosts, their passage, the fields in which the summer corn was ripening, the first trembling heat and beauty of a quiet day in early June. No sound in the world but peace, the woods opening around them as they advanced. He lay back on his bumping cart, watching the world as though he was seeing pictures of some place where he had once been but long left. Yes, long ago he had left it. His world was now a narrow burning chamber, in which dwelt with him a taunting jeering torturing spirit of reminiscence. He saw with the utmost clearness every detail of his relationship with Marie Ivanovna. He had no doubt at all that that relationship was finally, hopelessly closed. His was not a character that was the stronger for misfortune. He submitted, crushed to the ground. His mind now dwelt upon that journey from Petrograd, a journey of incredible, ironic ecstasy lighted with the fires of the wonderful spring that had accompanied it. He recalled every detail of his conversation with me. His confidence that life would now be fine for him⁠—how could life ever be fine for a man who let the prizes, the treasures, slip from his fingers, without an attempt to clutch them? It was so now that he saw the whole of the affair⁠—blame of Marie Ivanovna there was none, only of his own weakness, his imbecile, idiotic weakness. In that last conversation with her why could he not have said that he refused to let her go, held to her, dominated her, as a strong man would have done? No, without a word, except a cry of impotent childish rage, he had submitted.⁠ ⁠… So, all his life it had been⁠—so, all his life it would be.</p>
			<p>He could only wonder now at his easy ready belief that happiness would last for him. Had happiness ever lasted? As a man began so he ended. Life laughed at him and would always laugh. Nevertheless, he <em>had</em> that journey⁠—five days of perfect unalloyed delight. Nobody could rob him of that. She had said to him that even at the beginning of the journey she had known that she did not love him⁠—she had known but he had not, and even though he had cheated himself with the glittering bubble of an illusion the splendour had been there.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Meanwhile behind his despair there was something else stirring. He has told me that upon that afternoon he was only very dimly, very very faintly aware of it, aware of it only fiercely to deny it. He knew, however stoutly he might refuse to acknowledge it, that the events of the last weeks had bred in him some curiosity, some excitement that he could not analyse. He would like to have thought that his life began and ended only in Marie Ivanovna, but the Battle of S⁠⸺ had, as it were in spite of himself, left something more.</p>
			<p>He found that he recalled the details of that battle as though his taking part in it had bound him to something. Even it was suggested to him that there was something now that he must do outside his love for Marie Ivanovna, something that had perhaps no connexion with her at all. In the very heart of his misery he was conscious that a little pulse was beating that was strange to him, foreign to him; it was as though he were warned that he had embarked upon some voyage that must be carried through to the very end. He was, in truth, less completely overwhelmed by his catastrophe than he knew.</p>
			<p>As they now advanced and entered upon the first outworks of the Carpathians the day clouded. They stumbled down into a little narrow brown valley and drove there by the side of an ugly naked stream, wandering sluggishly through mud and weeds. Over them the woods, grey and sullen, had completely closed. The sun, a round glazed disk sharply defined but without colour, was like a dirty plate in the sky. Up again into the woods, then over rough cart tracks, they came finally to a standstill amongst thick brushwood and dripping undergrowth.</p>
			<p>They could hear, very far away, the noise of cannon. The sanitars were inclined to grumble. “Nice sort of business, looking for dead men here, your Honour.⁠ ⁠… We must leave the carts here and go on foot. What’s it wet for? It hasn’t been raining.”</p>
			<p>Why was it wet, indeed? A heavy brooding inertia, Trenchard has told me, seemed to seize them all. “They were not pleasant trees, you know,” I remember his after wards telling me, “all dirty and tangled, and we all looked dirty too. There was an unpleasant smell in the air. But that afternoon I simply didn’t care about anything, nothing mattered.” I don’t think that the sanitars at that time respected Trenchard very greatly. He wasn’t, in any case, a man of authority and his broken stammering Russian wouldn’t help him. Then there is nothing stranger than the fashion in which the Russian language will (if you are a timid foreigner), of a sudden wilfully desert you. Be bold with it and it may, somewhat haughtily, perhaps, consent to your use of it⁠ ⁠… be frightened of it and it will despise you for ever. Upon that afternoon it deserted Trenchard; even his own language seemed to have left him. His brain was cold and damp like the woods around him.</p>
			<p>They passed through the thickets and came, to their great surprise, upon a trench occupied by soldiers. This surprised them because they had heard that the Austrians were many versts distant. The soldiers also seemed to wonder. They explained their mission to a young officer who seemed at first as though he would ask them something, then checked himself, gave them permission to pass through and watched them with grave gaze. After they had crossed the barbed wire the woods suddenly closed about them as though a door had been softly shut behind them. The ground now squelched beneath their feet, the sky between the trees was like damp blotting-paper, and the smell that had been only faintly in the air before was now heavy around them, blown in thick gusts as the wind moved through the trees. Shrapnel now could be distinctly heard at no great distance, with its hiss, its snap of sound, and sometimes rifle-shots like the crack of a ball on a cricket bat broke through the thickets. They separated, spreading like beaters in a long line: “Soon,” Trenchard told me, “I was quite alone. I could hear sometimes the breaking of a twig or a stumbling footfall but I might have been alone at the end of the world. It was obvious that the regimental sanitars had been there before us because there were many new roughly made graves. There were letters too and post cards lying about all heavy with wet and dirt. I picked up some of these⁠—letters from lovers and sisters and brothers. One letter I remember in a large baby-hand from a boy to his father telling him about his lessons and his drill, ‘because he would soon be a soldier.’ One letter, too, from a girl to her lover saying that she had had a dream and knew now that her ‘dear Franz, whom she loved with all her soul, would return to her!⁠ ⁠… I am quite confident now that we shall be happy here again very soon.⁠ ⁠…’ In such a place, those words.”</p>
			<p>As he walked alone there he felt, as I had felt before the battle of S⁠⸺, that he had already been there. He knew those trees, that smell, that heavy overhanging sky. Then he remembered, as I had remembered, his dream. But whereas that dream had been to me only a reflected story, with him it had lasted throughout his life. He knew every step of that first advance into the forest, the look back to the long dim white house with shadowy figures still about it, the avenue with many trees, the horses and dogs down the first grey path, then the sudden loneliness, the quiet broken only by the dripping of the trees.</p>
			<p>Always that had caught him by the throat with terror, and now to-day he was caught once again. He was watched: he fancied that he could see the eyes behind the thicket and hear the rustling movement of somebody. To-day he could hear nothing. If at last his dream was to be fashioned into reality let it be so. Did the creature wish to destroy him, let it be so. He had no strength, no hope, no desire.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“It was there,” he told me, “when I scarcely knew what was real and what was not, that I saw that for which I was searching. I noticed first the dark grey-blue of the trousers, then the white skull. There was a horrible stench in the air. I called and the sanitars answered me. Then I looked at it. I had never seen a dead man before. This man had been dead for about a fortnight, I suppose. Its grey-blue trousers and thick boots were in excellent condition and a tin spoon and some papers were showing out of the top of one boot. Its face was a grinning skull and little black animals like ants were climbing in and out of the mouth and the eye-sockets. Its jacket was in good condition, its arms were flung out beyond its head. I felt sick and the whole place was so damp and smelt so badly that it must have been horribly unhealthy. The sanitars began to dig a grave. Those who were not working smoked cigarettes, and they all stood in a group watching the body with a solemn and serious interest. One of them made a little wooden cross out of some twigs. There was a letter just beside the body which they brought me. It began: ‘Darling Heinrich⁠—Your last letter was so cheerful that I have quite recovered from my depression. It may not be so long now before⁠ ⁠…’ and so on, like the other letters that I had read. It grinned at us there with a devilish sarcasm, but its trousers and boots were pitiful and human. The men finished the grave and then, with their feet, turned it over. As it rolled a flood of bright yellow insects swarmed out of its jacket, and a grey liquid trickled out of the skull. The last I saw of it was the gleam of the tin spoon above its boot.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“We searched after that,” he told me, “for several hours and found three more bodies. They were Austrians, in the condition of the first. I walked in a dream of horror. It was, I suppose, a bad day for me to have come with my other unhappiness weighing upon me, but I was, in some stupid way, altogether unprepared for what I had seen. I had, as I have told you, thought of death very often in my life but I had never thought of it like this. I did not now think of death very clearly but only of the uselessness of trying to bear up against anything when that was all one came to in the end. I felt my very bones crumble and my flesh decay on my body, as I stood there. I felt as though I had really been caught at last after a silly aimless flight and that even if I had the strength or cleverness to escape I had not the desire to try. I had been mocked with a week’s happiness only to have it taken from me for my enemy’s ironic enjoyment. I had a quite definite consciousness of my enemy. I had as a boy thought, you remember, of my uncle⁠—and now, as I moved through the wood, I could hear the old man’s chuckle just as he had chuckled in the old days, snapping his fingers together and twitching his nose.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>They searched the wood until late in the afternoon, trampling through the wet, peering through thickets, listening for one another’s voices, finding sometimes a trophy in the shape of an empty shrapnel case, an Austrian cap or dagger. Then, quite suddenly, a sanitar noticed that the bursting of the shrapnel was much closer than it had been during the early afternoon. It was now, indeed, very near and they could sometimes see the flash of fire between the trees.</p>
			<p>“There’s something strange about this, your Honour,” said one of the sanitars nervously, and they all looked at Trenchard as though it were his fault that they were there. Then close behind them, with a snap of rage, a shrapnel broke amongst the trees. After that they turned for home, without a word to one another, not running but hastening with flushed faces as though some one were behind them.</p>
			<p>They came to the trench and to their surprise found it absolutely deserted. Then, plunging on, they arrived at the two wagons, climbed on to one of them, leaving Trenchard alone with the driver on the other. “I tell you,” he remarked to me afterwards, “I sank into that wagon as though into my grave. I don’t know that ever before or since in my life have I felt such exhaustion. It was reaction, I suppose⁠—a miserable, wretched exhaustion that left me well enough aware that I was the most unhappy of men and simply forced me, without a protest, to accept that condition. Moreover, I had always before me the vision of the dead body. Wherever I turned there it was, grinning at me, the black flies crawling in and out of its jaws, and behind it something that said to me: ‘There! now I have shown you what I can do.⁠ ⁠… To that you’re coming.’⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He must have slept because he was suddenly conscious of sitting up in his car, surrounded by an intense stillness. He looked about him but could see nothing clearly, as though he were still sleeping. Then he was aware of a sanitar standing below the cart, looking up at him with great agitation and saying again and again: “<i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Borjé moi! Borjé moi! Borjé moi!</i>”</p>
			<p>“What is it?” he asked, rubbing his eyes. The sanitar then seemed to slip away leaving him alone with a vague sense of disaster. The sun had set, but there was a moon, full and high, and now by its light he could see that his wagon was standing outside the gate of the house at M⁠⸺. There was the yard, the bandaging-room, the long faded wall of the house, the barn, but where?⁠ ⁠… where?⁠ ⁠… He sat up, then jumped down on to the road. The big white tent on the further side of the yard, the tent that had, that very morning, been full of wounded, was gone. The lines of wagons, horses and tents that had filled the field across the road were gone. No voices came from the house⁠—somewhere a door banged persistently⁠—other sound there was none.</p>
			<p>The sanitars then surrounded him, speaking all together, waving their arms, their faces white under the moon, their eyes large and frightened like the eyes of little children. He tried to push their babel off from him. He could not understand.⁠ ⁠… Was this a continuation of the nightmare of the afternoon? There was a roar just behind their ears as it seemed. They saw a light flash upon the sky and fade, flash again and fade. With their faces towards the horizon they watched.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” Trenchard said at last. There advanced towards him then from out of the empty house an old man in a wide straw hat with a broom.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” Trenchard said again.</p>
			<p>“It’s the Austrians,” said the old man in Polish, of which Trenchard understood very little. “First it’s the Russians.⁠ ⁠… Then it’s the Austrians.⁠ ⁠… Then it’s the Russians.⁠ ⁠… Then it’s the Austrians. And always between each of them I have to clean things up”⁠—and some more which Trenchard did not understand. The old man then stood at his gate watching them with a gaze serious, sad, reflective. Meanwhile the sanitars had discovered one of our own soldiers: this man, who had been sitting under a hedge and listening to the Austrian cannon with very uncomfortable feelings, told them of the affair. At three o’clock that afternoon our Otriad had been informed that it must retreat “within half an hour.” Not only our own Sixty-Fifth Division, but the whole of the Ninth Army was retreating “within half an hour.” Moreover the Austrians were ad vancing “a verst a minute.” By four o’clock the whole of our Otriad had disappeared, leaving only this soldier to inform us that we must move on at once to T⁠⸺ or S⁠⸺, twenty or thirty versts distant.</p>
			<p>“Retreating!” cried Trenchard. “But we were winning! We’d just won a battle!”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Tak totchno!</i>” said the soldier gravely, “Twenty versts! the horses won’t do it, your Honour!”</p>
			<p>“They’ve got to do it!” said Trenchard sharply, and the echo of the Austrian cannon, again as it seemed quite close at hand, emphasised his words. Except for this the silence of the world around them was eerie; only far away they seemed to hear the persistent rumble of carts on the road.</p>
			<p>“They’re gone! They’re all gone! We’re left last of all!” and “The Austrians advancing a verst a minute!”</p>
			<p>He took a last look at the house which had seemed yesterday so absolutely to belong to them and now was already making preparations for its new guests. As he gazed he thought of his agony in that field below the house. Only last night and now what years ago it seemed! What years, what years ago!</p>
			<p>He climbed wearily again upon his wagon. There had entered into his unhappiness now a new element. This was a sensation of cold despairing anger that ground should be yielded so helplessly. About every field, every hedge and lane and tree, as slowly they jogged along he felt this. Only to-day this corn, these stones, these flowers were Russian, and to-morrow Austrian! This, as it seemed, simply out of the air, dictated by some whispering devil crouching behind a hedge, afraid to appear! This, too, when only a few hours ago there had been that battle of S⁠⸺ won by them after a struggle of many days; that position, soaked with Russian blood, to be surrendered now as a leaf blows in the wind.</p>
			<p>When they arrived at T⁠⸺ and found our Otriad he was, I believe, so deeply exhausted that he was not conscious of his actions. His account to me of what then occurred is fantastic and confused. He discovered apparently the house where we were; it was then one o’clock in the morning. Every one was asleep. There seemed to be no place for him to be, he could find neither candles nor matches, and he wandered out into the road again. Then, it seems, he was standing beside a deep lake. “I can remember nothing clearly except that the lake was black and endless. I stood looking at it. I could see the bodies out of the forest, only now they were slipping along the water, their skulls white and gleaming. I had also a confused impression that Russia was beaten and the war over. And that for me too life was utterly at an end.⁠ ⁠… I remember that I deliberately thought of Marie because it hurt so abominably. I repeated to myself the incidents of the night before, all of them, talking aloud to myself. I decided then that I would drown myself in the lake. It seemed the only thing to do. I took my coat off. Then sat down in the mud and took off my boots. Why I did this I don’t know. I looked at the water, thought that it would be cold, but that it would soon be over because I couldn’t swim. I heard the frogs, looked back at the flickering fires amongst our wagons, then walked down the bank.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Nikitin must for some time have been watching him, because at that moment he stepped forward, took Trenchard’s arm, and drew him back. Nikitin has himself told me that he was walking up and down the road that night because he could not sleep. When he spoke to Trenchard the man seemed dazed and bewildered, said something about “life being all over for him and⁠—death being horrible!”</p>
			<p>Nikitin put his arm round him, took him back to his room, where he made him a bed on the floor, gave him a sleeping-draught and watched him until he slept.</p>
			<p>That was the true beginning of the friendship between Nikitin and Trenchard.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
