<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: The Forest</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Forest</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>And now I am confronted with a very serious difficulty. There is nothing stranger in this whole business of the life and character of war than the fashion in which an atmosphere that has been of the intensest character can, by the mere advance or retreat of a pace or two, disappear, close in upon itself, present the blindest front to the soul that has, a moment before, penetrated it. It is as though one had visited a house for the first time. The interior is of the most absorbing and unique interest. There are revealed in it beauties, terrors, of so sharp a reality that one believes that one’s life is changed forever by the sight of them. One passes the door, closes it behind one, steps into the outer world, looks back, and there is only before one’s view a thick cold wall⁠—the windows are dead, there is no sound, only bland, dull, expressionless space. Moreover this dull wall, almost instantly, persuades one of the incredibility of what one has seen. There were no beauties, there were no terrors.⁠ ⁠… Ordinary life closes round one, trivial things reassume their old importance, one disbelieves in fantastic dreams.</p>
			<p>I believe that everyone who has had experience of war will admit the truth of this. I had myself already known something of the kind and had wondered at the fashion in which the crossing of a mere verst or two can bring the old life about one. I had known it during the battle of S⁠⸺, in the days that followed the battle, in moments of the Retreat, when for half an hour we would suddenly be laughing and careless as though we were in Petrograd.</p>
			<p>And so when I look back to the weeks of whose history I wish now to give a truthful account, I am afraid of myself. I wish to give nothing more than the facts, and yet that something that is <em>more</em> than the facts is of the first, and indeed the only, importance. Moreover the last impression that I wish to convey is that war is a <em>hysterical</em> business. I believe that that succession of days in the forest of S⁠⸺, the experience of Nikitin, Semyonov, Andrey Vassilievitch, Trenchard and myself⁠—might have occurred to anyone, must have occurred to many other persons, but from the cool safe foundation on which now I stand it cannot but seem exceptional, even exaggerated. Exaggerated, in very truth, I know that it is not. And yet this life⁠—so ordered, so disciplined, so rational, and <strong>that</strong> life⁠—where do they join?⁠ ⁠… I penetrated but a little way; my friends penetrated into the very heart⁠ ⁠… and, because I was left outside, I remain the only possible recorder: but a recorder who can offer only signs, moments, glimpses through a closing door.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>I am waiting now for the return of my opportunity.</p>
			<p>On the night of the death of Marie Ivanovna I slept a heavy, dreamless sleep. I was wakened between six and seven the next morning by Nikitin, who told me that he, Trenchard, Andrey Vassilievitch and I were to return at once to the forest. I realised at once that indescribable quiver in the air of momentous events. The house was quite still, the summer morning very fresh and clear, but the air was weighted with some crisis. It was not only the death of Marie Ivanovna that was present with us, it was rather something that told us that now no individual life or death counted⁠ ⁠… individualities, personalities, were swallowed up in the sweeping urgency of a great climax. Nikitin simply told me that a furious battle was raging some ten versts on the other side of the river, that we were to go at once to form a temporary hospital behind the lines in the Forest; that the nurses and the rest of the Otriad would remain in Mittövo to wait for the main tide of the wounded, but that we were to go forward to help the army doctors. He spoke very quietly. We said nothing of Marie Ivanovna.</p>
			<p>I dressed quickly and on going out found the wagons waiting, some fifteen or twenty sanitars and Trenchard and Andrey Vassilievitch. The four of us climbed into one of the wagons and set off. I did not see Semyonov. Trenchard was pale, there were heavy black lines under his eyes⁠—but he seemed calm, and he stared in front of him as though he were absorbed by some concentrated self-control. For the first time in my experience of him he seemed to me a strong independent character.</p>
			<p>We did not speak at all. I could see that Andrey Vassilievitch was nervous: his eyes were anxious and now and then he moistened his lips with his tongue. When we had crossed the river and began to climb the hill I knew that I <em>hated</em> the Forest. It was looking beautiful under the early morning sun, its green so delicate and clear, its soft shadows so cool, its birds singing so carelessly, the silver birches, lines of light against the dark spaces; but this was all to me now as though it had been arranged by some ironic hand. It knew well enough who had died there yesterday and it was preparing now, behind its black recesses, a rich harvest for its malicious spirit. We passed through the cholera village and reached the white house of yesterday at about ten o’clock. As we clattered up to the door I for a moment closed my eyes. I felt as though I could not face the horrible place, then summoning my control I boldly challenged it, surveying its long broken windows, its high doorway, its sunny, insulting garden. We were met by the stout doctor, whom I had seen before. As he is of some importance in the events that followed I will mention his name⁠—Konstantine Feodorovitch Kryllow. He was large and stout, a true Russian type, with a merry laughing face. He had the true Russian spirit of unconquerable irrational merriment. He laughed at everything with the gaiety of a man who finds life too preposterous for words. He had all the Russian untidyness, kindness of heart, gay, ironical pessimism. “Tomorrow” was a word unknown to him: nothing was sacred to him, and yet at times it seemed as though life were so holy, so mysterious, that the only way to keep it from careless eyes was by laughing at it. He had no principles, no plans, no prejudices, no reverences. If he wished to sleep for a week he would do so, if he wished to eat for a week he would do so. If he died tomorrow he did not care⁠ ⁠… it was all so absurd that it was not worth while to give it any attention. He would grow very fat, he would die⁠—he would love women, play cards, drink, quarrel, give his life for a sentimental moment, pour every farthing of his possessions into the lap of a friend, incur debts which he would not pay, quarrel wildly with a man about a rouble, remember things that you would expect him to forget, forget everything that he should remember⁠—a pagan, a saint, a blackguard, a hero⁠—anything you please so long as you do not take it seriously.</p>
			<p>This morning he was dirty and looked as though he had slept for many nights without taking off his clothes⁠—unshaven, his shirt open showing his hairy chest, his eyes blinking in the light.</p>
			<p>“That’s good,” he said, seeing us. “I’ve got to be off, leaving the place to you.⁠ ⁠… Fearful time they’re having over there,” pointing across the garden. “Yes, five versts away. Plenty of work in a minute. Brought food with you? Very little here.” Then I heard him begin, as he walked into the house with Nikitin, “Terrible thing, Doctor, about your Sister yesterday.⁠ ⁠… Terrible.⁠ ⁠… I⁠—”</p>
			<p>I remember that my great desire was that I should not be left alone with Trenchard. I clung to Andrey Vassilievitch, and a poor resource he was, watching with nervous eyes the building and the glimmering forest, dusting his clothes and beginning sentences which he did not finish, Trenchard was quite silent. We entered the horrible room of yesterday. The dirty plate and the sardine-tin were still there with the flies about them: the highly coloured German supplement watched us from its rakish position on the wall, the treatise on New Mexico was lying on the table. I picked up the book and it opened naturally at a place where the last reader had turned down the corner of the page. The same page happens to be quoted exactly in Trenchard’s diary on an occasion about which afterwards I shall have to speak. There is an account of the year’s work of some New Mexican school and it runs:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Besides the regular class work there have been other features of special merit, programmes of which we append:</p>
				<p>“Lectures: <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. W.</abbr> Ruffner, Titles and Degrees; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fred <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bush, What the Community owes the Newspaper and what the Newspaper owes the Community; <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. H.</abbr> Woods, Tuberculosis; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. R.</abbr> Glass, Fools; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Eugene Warren, Blood of the Nation; <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. M.</abbr> Strong, Orthopedics; <abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. M.</abbr> Ashenfelter, Freedom of Effort; <abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. T.</abbr> Cessna, Don’t Pay too dearly for the Whistle; <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O. S.</abbr> Westlake, The Physician and the Laity; <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Wellington Putman, Rip Van Winkle; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Hanshaw, The Mind’s Picture Gallery; <abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. M.</abbr> Turner, Opportunities.</p>
				<p>“<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Othello</i>. For the first time the normal students presented for the class-day exercise a Shakespearian play, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Othello</i>. Cast of characters: Othello, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. F.</abbr> Dunlavey; Iago, Douglas Giffard; Duke of Venice, Charles Harper; Brabantio, Eugene Cosgrove; Cassio, Arnold Rosenfeld; Roderigo, Erwin Moore; Montano, Wilson Portherfield; Lodovico, Henry Geitz; Gratiano, William Fleming; Desdemona, Carrie Whitehill; Emilia, Gussie Rodgers; Bianca, Florence Otter; senators, officers, messengers and attendants.</p>
				<p>“<i>Graduating Programme.</i> Music: the Anglo-Saxon in History, Douglas Giffard; the Anglo-Saxon in Science, Florence Otter; the Anglo-Saxon in Literature, Gussie Rodgers; Music; annual address, <abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. M.</abbr> Turner; Music; presentation of diplomas.</p>
				<p>“Doubtless among the most interesting and most profitable events of the institution was the annual society contest between the two societies, the Literati and the Lyceum. The Silver City Commercial Club offered a costly cup to the winning society and it was won by the Lyceum. The contest was in oration, elocution, debate, parliamentary usage and athletics.</p>
				<p>“The inside adornment of the hall has not been neglected. A number of portraits and a large number of carbon prints of celebrated paintings have been added, the class picture being the most important and costing in the neighbourhood of $100; this is the hunting scene of Ruysdael. Some of the others are <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">The Parthenon</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">The Immaculate Conception</i> by Murillo, and <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">The Allegorie du Printemps</i> by Botticelli. Many valuable specimens have been added to the museum: among these are minerals, animals and vegetable products, and manufactured articles from abroad illustrative of the habits and customs of foreigners.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I give this page in full because it was afterwards to have importance, though at the time I glanced at it only carelessly. But I remember that I speculated on the lecture by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. R.</abbr> Glass about “Fools,” that I admired a contest so widely extended as to embrace oration, parliamentary usage and athletics, that I liked very much the “class Ruysdael,” “costing in the neighbourhood of $100,” and the “manufactured articles from abroad, illustrative of the habits and customs of foreigners.”</p>
			<p>Nikitin came up to me. “Will you please set off at once with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> to Vulatch?” he said. “Find there Colonel Maximoff and get direct orders from him. Return as soon as possible. They say we’re not likely to have wounded until late this afternoon⁠—a good thing as a lot wants doing to this place. Hasten, Ivan Andreievitch. No time to lose.”</p>
			<p>Vulatch was a little town situated ten versts to our right in the Forest. I had heard of its strange position before, quite a town and yet lying in the very heart of the Forest, as though it had been the settlement of some early colonists. It had running through it a good high road, but otherwise was far removed from the outer world. It had during the war been twice bombarded and was now, I believed, ruined and deserted. For the moment it was the headquarters of the Sixty-Fifth Staff. I was frankly frightened of going alone with Trenchard⁠—frightened both of myself and of him. I told him and without a word he went with me. When we started off in the wagon I looked at him. He was sitting on the straw, very quietly, his hands folded, looking in front of him. He seemed older: the sentimental naivete that had been always in his face seemed now entirely to have left him. He had always looked before as though he wanted someone to help him out of a position that was too difficult for him; now he was alone in a world where no one could reach him. During the whole drive to Vulatch we exchanged no word. The sound of the cannon was distant but incessant, and strangely, as it seemed to me, we were alone. Once and again soldiers passed us, sometimes wagons with kitchens or provisions met us on the road, sometimes groups of men were waiting by the roadside, once we saw them setting up telegraph wires, once a desolate band of Austrian prisoners crossed our path, twice wagons with wounded rumbled along⁠—but for the most part we were alone. We were out of the main track of the battle. It was as though the Forest had arranged this that it might the more impress us. Our road, although it was the high road, was rough and uneven and we advanced slowly: with every step that the horses took I was the more conscious of a sinister and malign influence. I know how easily one’s nerves can lend atmosphere to something that is in itself innocent and harmless enough, but it must be remembered that (at this time), in spite of what had happened yesterday, neither Trenchard’s nerves nor mine were strained. My sensation must, I think, have closely resembled the feelings of a diver who, for the first time, descends below the water. I had never felt anything like this before and there was quite definitely about my eyes, my nose, my mouth, a feeling of suffocation. I can only say that it was exactly as though I were breathing in an atmosphere that was strange to me. This may have been partly the effect of the sun that was beating down very strongly upon us, but it was also, curiously enough, the result of some dimness that obscured the direct path of one’s vision. On every side of our rough forest road there were black cavernous spaces set here and there like caves between sheets of burning sunlight. Into these caves one’s gaze simply could not penetrate, and the light and darkness shifted about one with exactly the effect of stirring, swaying water. Although the way was quite clear and the road broad I felt as though at any moment our advance would be stopped by an impenetrable barrier, a barrier of bristled thickets, of an iron wall, of a sudden, fathomless precipice. Of course to both Trenchard and myself there were, during this drive, thoughts of his dream. We both recognized, although at this time we did not speak of it, that this was the very place that had now grown so vivid to us. “Ah, this is how it looks in sunlight!” I would think to myself, having seen it always in the early morning and cold. Behind me the long white house, the hunters, the dogs.⁠ ⁠… No, they were not here in the burning suffocating sunlight, but they would come⁠—they would come!</p>
			<p>The monotony of the place emphasised its vastness. It was not, I suppose, a great Forest, but today it seemed as though we were winding further and further, through labyrinth after labyrinth of clouding obscurity, winding towards some destination from which we could never again escape. <i>Pum⁠—pum⁠—pum</i>, whispered the cannon; <i>Whirr⁠—whirr⁠—whirr</i>, the shadowy trembling background echoed. Then with a sudden lifting of the curtain Vulatch was revealed to us. Ruined towns and villages were, by this time, no new sight to me, but this place was different from anything that I had ever seen before. From the bend of the little hill we looked down upon it and the sight of it made me shudder. It was the deadest place, the <em>deadest</em> place in the world⁠—all white under the sun it lay there like the bleached bones of some animal picked clean long ago by the birds.</p>
			<p>Not a sound came from it, not a movement could be discerned in it. I could see, standing out straight from the heart of it, what must have been once a fine church. It had had four green turrets perched like little green bubbles on white towers; three of these were still there, and between them stood the white husk of the place; from where we watched we could see little fires of blue light sparkling like jewels between the holes. Over it all was a strange metallic glitter as though we were seeing through glass, glass shaded very faintly green. Under this green shadow, which seemed very gently to stain the air, the town was indeed like a lost city beneath the sea. Catching our breaths we plunged down into the fantastic depths.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>As we descended the hill we were surprised by the silence⁠—not a soul to be seen. We had expected to find the place filled with the soldiers of the Sixty-Fifth Division. Our driver on this day was the man Nikolai whom I have mentioned before as attaching himself from the very beginning to Trenchard’s service. He had been Trenchard’s unofficial servant now for a long time, saying very little, always succeeding, in some quiet fashion of his own, in accompanying Trenchard on his expeditions. Nikolai was one of the quietest human beings I have ever known. His charming ugly face was in repose a little gloomy, not thoughtful so much as expectant, dreamy perhaps but also very practical and unidealistic. His smile changed all that; in a moment his face was merry, even good-humouredly malicious, suspicious, and a little ironical. He had the thick stolid body of the Russian peasant who is trained to any endurance, any misfortune that God might choose to send it. His attachment to Trenchard had been so unobtrusive that Molozov had officially permitted it without realising that he had permitted anything. It was so unobtrusive that I myself had not, during these last weeks, noticed it. Today I saw Nikolai glance many times at Trenchard. His eyes were anxious and inquiring; he looked at him rather as a dog may look at his master, although there was here no dumb submission, nor any sentimental weakness.⁠ ⁠… I should rather say that Nikolai looked at Trenchard as one free man may look at another. “What is the matter with you?” his eyes seemed to say. “But I know⁠ ⁠… a terrible thing has happened to you. At any rate I am here to be of any use that I can.”</p>
			<p>“Nikolai,” I said, “why is there no one here?”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Ne mogoo znat</i>, your Honour.”</p>
			<p>“Well, the first soldier you see you must ask.”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Tak totchno.</i>”</p>
			<p>“Who said you were to drive us?”</p>
			<p>“Vladimir Stepanovitch, your Honour.”</p>
			<p>“Are you going to remain with us?”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="ru-Latn">Tak totchno.</i>”</p>
			<p>His eyes rested for a moment on Trenchard, then he turned to his horses.</p>
			<p>We were entering the town now and it did, indeed, present to us a scene of desperate desolation. The place had been originally built in rising tiers on the side of the valley, and the principal street had leading out of it, up the hill, steps rising to balconied houses that commanded a view of the opposite hill. Almost every house in this street was in ruins; sometimes the ruins were complete⁠—only an isolated chimney of broken stone wall remaining, sometimes the shell was standing, the windows boarded up with wood, sometimes almost the whole building was there, a gaping space in the roof the only sign of desolation. And there remained the ironical signs of its earlier life. Many of the buildings had their titles still upon them. In one place I saw the blackened and almost illegible plate of a lawyer, in another a large still fresh-looking advertisement of a dentist, here there was the large lettering “Tobacconist,” there upon a trembling wall the tattered remains of an announcement of a sale of furniture. Once, most ironical of all, a gaping and smoke-stained building showed the half-torn remnant of a cinematograph picture, a fat gentleman in a bowler hat entering with a lady on either arm a gaily painted restaurant. Over this, in big letters, the word “<b>farce</b>.”</p>
			<p>Although we saw no soldiers we were not entirely alone. In and out of the sunny caverns, appearing outlined against the darkness, vanishing in a sudden blaze of light, were shadows of the citizens of Vulatch. They seemed to me, without exception, to be Jews. From most of the Galician towns and villages the Jews had been expelled⁠—here they only, apparently, had been left. Of women I saw scarcely any⁠—old men, with long dirty black or grizzled beards, yellow skins, peaked black caps, and filthy black gowns clutched about their thin bodies. They watched us, silently, ominously, maliciously. They crept from door to door, stole up the stone steps and vanished, appeared, as it seemed, right beneath our horses’ feet and disappeared. If we caught them with our eyes they bowed with a loathsome, trembling subservience. There were many little Jewish children, with glittering eyes, naked feet, bare scrubby heads and white faces. Nikolai at length caught an old man and asked him where the soldiers were. The old man replied in very tolerable Russian that all the soldiers had gone last night⁠—not one of them remained⁠—but he believed that some more were shortly to arrive. They were always coming and going, he said.</p>
			<p>We stayed where we were, under the blazing sun, and held council. In every doorway, in every shadow, there were eyes watching us. The whole town was overweighted, overwhelmed by the brooding Forest. From where we stood I could see it rising on every side of us like a trembling, threatening green wave; in the furious heat of the sun the white ruins seemed to jump and leap.</p>
			<p>“Well,” I said to Trenchard, “what’s to be done?”</p>
			<p>He pulled himself back from his thoughts.</p>
			<p>He had been sitting in the cart, quite motionless, his face white and hidden, as though he slept. He raised his tired, heavy eyes to my face.</p>
			<p>“Do?” he said.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I answered impatiently. “Didn’t you hear what Nikolai said? There are no soldiers here. We can’t find Maximoff because he isn’t here. We must go back, I suppose.”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” he answered indifferently.</p>
			<p>“I’m not going back,” I said, “until I’ve had something to drink⁠—tea or coffee. I wonder whether there’s anything here⁠—any place we could go to.”</p>
			<p>Nikolai inquired. Old Shylock pointed with his bony finger down the street.</p>
			<p>“Very fine restaurant there,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Will you come and see?” I asked Trenchard.</p>
			<p>“Very well,” said Trenchard.</p>
			<p>I told Nikolai to stay there and wait for us. I walked down the street, followed by Trenchard. I found on my left, at the top of a little flight of steps, a house that was for the most part untouched by the general havoc around and about it. The lower windows were cracked and the door open and gaping, but there stood, quite bravely with new paint, the word “Restoration” on the lintel and there were even curtains about the upper windows. Passing through the door we found a room decently clean, and behind the little bar a stout red-faced Galician in white shirt and grey trousers, a citizen of the normal world. We were just then his only customers. We asked him for tea and sat down at a little table in the corner of the room. He did not talk to us but stood in his place humming cheerfully to himself and cleaning glasses. He was a rogue, I thought, looking at his little eyes, but at any rate a merry rogue; he certainly had kept off from him the general death and desolation that had overwhelmed his neighbours. I sat opposite to Trenchard and wondered what to say to him. His expression had never varied. As I looked at him I could not but think of the strength of his eyes, of his mouth, the quiet concentration of his hands⁠ ⁠… a different figure from the smiling uncertain man on the Petrograd station⁠—how many years ago?</p>
			<p>Our tea was brought to us. Then quite suddenly Trenchard said to me:</p>
			<p>“Did she say anything before she died?”</p>
			<p>“No,” I answered quietly. “She died instantly, they told me.”</p>
			<p>“How exactly was she killed?”</p>
			<p>His eyes watched my face without falter, clearly, gravely, steadfastly.</p>
			<p>“She was killed by a bullet. Stepped out from behind her shelter and it happened at once. She can have suffered nothing.”</p>
			<p>“And Semyonov <em>let</em> her?”</p>
			<p>“He could not have prevented it. It might have happened to anyone.”</p>
			<p>“I would have prevented it,” he said, nodding his head gravely.</p>
			<p>He was silent for a little; then with a sudden jerk he said:</p>
			<p>“Where has she gone?”</p>
			<p>“Gone?” I repeated stupidly after him.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—that’s not death⁠—to go like that. She must be somewhere still⁠—somewhere in this beastly forest. What⁠—afterwards⁠—when you saw her⁠—what?⁠ ⁠… her face?⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“She looked very peaceful⁠—quite happy.”</p>
			<p>“No restlessness in her face? No anxiety?”</p>
			<p>“None.”</p>
			<p>“But all that life⁠—that energy. It can’t have stopped. Quite suddenly. It <em>can’t</em>. She can’t have wanted <em>not</em> to know all those things that she was so eager about before.” He was suddenly voluble, excited, leaning forward, staring at me. “You know how she was. You must have seen it numbers of times⁠—how she never looked at any of us really, how we were none of us⁠—no, not even Semyonov⁠—anything to her <em>really</em>; always staring past us, wanting to know the answer to questions that <em>we</em> couldn’t solve for her. She wouldn’t give it all up simply for nothing, simply for a bullet⁠ ⁠…” he broke off.</p>
			<p>“Look here, Trenchard,” I said, “try not to think of her just now more than you can help, <em>just now</em>. We’re in for a stiff time, I believe. This will be our last easy afternoon, I fancy, and even now we ought to be back helping Nikitin. You’ve got to work all you know. One’s nerves get wrong easily enough in a place like this⁠—and after what has happened I feel this damned Forest already. But we mustn’t <em>let</em> our nerves go. We’ve simply got to work and think about nothing at all⁠—<em>think about nothing at all</em>.”</p>
			<p>I don’t believe that he heard me.</p>
			<p>“Semyonov?” he said slowly. “What did he do?”</p>
			<p>“He was very quiet,” I answered. “He didn’t say anything. He looked awful.”</p>
			<p>“Yes. She snapped her fingers at <em>him</em> anyway. <em>He</em> couldn’t keep her for all his bullying.”</p>
			<p>“It pretty well killed him,” I said rather fiercely. “Look here, Trenchard. Don’t think of yourself⁠—or of her. Everyone’s in it now. There isn’t any personality about it. We’ve simply got to do our best and not think about it. It’s thinking that beats one if one lets it.”</p>
			<p>“Semyonov⁠ ⁠… Semyonov,” he repeated to himself, smiling. “No, <em>he</em> had not power over her.” Then looking at me very calmly, he remarked: “This Death, you know, Durward.⁠ ⁠… It simply doesn’t exist. It can’t stop <em>her</em>. It can’t stop <em>anyone</em> if they’re determined. I’ll find her before Semyonov does, too.”</p>
			<p>Then, as though he had waked from sleep, he said to me, his voice trembling a little: “Am I talking queerly, Durward? If I am, don’t think anything of it. It’s this heat⁠—and this place. Let’s get back.” He only spoke once more. He said: “Do you remember that first drive⁠—ages ago, when we saw the trenches and heard the frogs and I thought there was someone there?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I said. “I remember.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it’s rather like that now, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>A pretty girl, twenty-two or twenty-three years of age, obviously the daughter of the red-faced proprietor, came up to us and asked us if we would like any more tea. She would be stout later on, her red cheeks were plump and her black hair arranged coquettishly in little shining curls. She smiled on us.</p>
			<p>“No more tea?” she said.</p>
			<p>“No more,” I answered.</p>
			<p>“You will not be staying here?”</p>
			<p>“Not tonight.”</p>
			<p>“We have a nice room here.”</p>
			<p>“No, thank you.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps one of you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No. We are returning tonight.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps, for an hour or two.” Then smiling at me and laughing a little, “I have known many officers⁠ ⁠… very many.”</p>
			<p>“No, thank you,” I said sternly.</p>
			<p>“I have a sister,” she said. She turned, crying: “Marie, Marie!”</p>
			<p>A little girl, who could not have been more than fourteen years of age, appeared from the background. She also was red-cheeked and plump; her hair also was arranged in black, shining curls. She stood looking at us, half smiling, half defiant, sucking her finger.</p>
			<p>“She also has known officers,” said the girl. “She would be very glad, if you cared⁠—”</p>
			<p>I heard their father behind the bar humming to himself.</p>
			<p>“Come out of this!” I said to Trenchard. “Come away!”</p>
			<p>He followed me quietly, bowing very politely to the staring sisters.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“Go on,” I said to Nikolai. “Drive on. No time to waste. We’ve got work to do.”</p>
			<p>On our return we found that the press of work was not as yet severe. Half the building belonged to us, the remaining half being used by the officers of the battery. Nikitin had arranged a large room, that must I think have been a dining-room in happier days, with beds; to the right was the operating-room, overhead were our bedrooms and the room where originally I had sat with Marie Ivanovna was a general meeting place. The officers of the battery, two middle-aged and two very young indeed, were extremely courteous and begged us to make use of them in any way possible. They were living in the raggedest fashion, a week’s growth of beard on their chins, their beds unmade, the floor littered with ends of cigarettes, pieces of paper, journals.</p>
			<p>“Been here weeks,” they apologetically explained to us. “Come in and have a meal with us whenever you like.” They resembled animals in a cave. When they were not on duty they played chemin-de-fer and slept. Meanwhile for three days and nights our work was slight. The battle drew further away into the Forest. Wagons with wounded came to us only at long intervals.</p>
			<p>The result of these three days was a strange new intimacy between the four of us. I have never in all my life seen anything more charming than the behaviour of Nikitin and Andrey Vassilievitch to Trenchard. There is something about Russian kindness that is both simpler and more tactful than any other kindness in the world. Tact is too often another name for insincerity, but Russian kindheartedness is the most honest impulse in the Russian soul, the quality that comes first, before anger, before injustice, before prejudice, before slander, before disloyalty, and overrides them all. They were, of course, conscious that Trenchard’s case was worse than their own. Marie Ivanovna’s death had shocked them, but she had been outside their lives and already she was fading from them. Trenchard was another matter. Nikitin seemed to me for the first time in my knowledge of him to come down from his idealistic dreaming. He cared for Trenchard like a child, but never obtrusively. Trenchard seemed to appreciate it, but there was something about him that I did not like. His nerves were tensely strained, he did his work with his eyes fixed upon some impossible distance, he often did not hear us when we spoke to him.</p>
			<p>And so the three of us formed a kind of hedge about him to protect him, a hedge of which he was perfectly unconscious. He was very silent and I would have given a great deal to hear again one of those Glebeshire stories that I had once found so tiresome. That some plan or purpose was in his head one could not doubt.</p>
			<p>We had, all of us, much in common in our characters. We liked the sentimental easy coloured view of life. We suddenly felt a strange freedom here in this place. For myself, on the third day, I found that Marie Ivanovna was most strangely present with me, and on the afternoon of that day, our wounded quiet on their beds, our wagons sent into the tent with no prospect of their return for several hours, we sat together, Nikitin, Andrey Vassilievitch and I, looking out through a break in the garden towards the Forest, and talked about her. The weather was now very heavy⁠—certainly a thunderstorm was coming. I was also weighted down by an intense desire for sleep, at the same time knowing that if I were to fling myself on my bed sleep would not come to me. This is an experience that is not unusual at the Front, and officers have told me that in the middle of a battle when there comes a sudden lull, their longing for sleep has been so overpowering that no imminent danger could lift it from their eyes.</p>
			<p>We sat there then and talked in low voices of Marie Ivanovna. I was aware of the buzzing of the flies, of the dull yellow light beyond the windows, of the Forest crouching a little as it seemed to me like a creature who expects a blow. We were all half asleep perhaps, the room dark behind us, and we talked of her as we might talk of a picture, a book, an experience ended and dismissed⁠—something outside our present affairs. And yet I knew that for me at any rate she was not outside them. I felt as though at any moment she might enter the room. We discussed her aloofness, her sudden happiness and her sudden distress, her intimacies and withdrawals, Nikitin and Andrey Vassilievitch slowly elaborating her into a high romantic figure. Behind her, behind all our thoughts of her, there was the presence of Semyonov. Nothing was stranger during our time here than the way that Semyonov had always kept us company.</p>
			<p>Our consciousness of relief from him had begun it. We had been more under his influence than any of us had cared to confess and, in his presence, had checked our natural impulses. I also was strongly aware of him through Trenchard. Trenchard seemed now to have a horror of him that could be explained only by the fact that he held him responsible for Marie Ivanovna’s death. <q>It’s a good thing,</q> I thought to myself, <q>that Semyonov’s not here.</q></p>
			<p>These hours of waiting, when there was nothing to do, was bad for all our nerves. Upon this afternoon I remember that after a time silence fell between us. We were all staring in front of us, seeing pictures of other places and other people. I was aware, as I always was, of the Forest, seeing it shine with its sinister green haze, seeing the white bleached town, the huddled villagers waiting for their food, but seeing yet more vividly the deep silences, the dark hollows, the silent avenues of silver birch. Against this were the figures of the people who were dear to me. It is strange how war selects and brings forward as one’s eternal company the one or two souls who have been of importance in one’s life. One knows then, in those long, long threatening pauses, when the battle seems to gather itself together before it thunders its next smashing blow, those who are one’s true companions. Certain English figures were now with me outlined against the Forest⁠—and joined together with them Marie Ivanovna as I had last seen her, turning round to me by the door and smiling upon me. I did truthfully feel, as Trenchard had said to me, that she was not dead; I sat, staring before me, conjuring her to appear. The others also sat there, staring in front of them. Were they also summoning some figure? I knew, as though Andrey Vassilievitch had told me, that he was thinking of his wife. And Nikitin?⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He sat there, lying back on the old sofa that Marie had used, his black beard, his long limbs, his dark eyes giving him the colour of some Eastern magician. He did indeed, with his intense, absorbed gaze, seem to be casting a spell. As I looked Andrey Vassilievitch caught his glance⁠—they exchanged the strangest flash⁠—something that was intimate and yet foreign, something appealing and yet hostile. It was as though Andrey Vassilievitch had said: “I know you are thinking of her. Leave her to me,” and Nikitin had replied: “My poor friend. What can you do?⁠ ⁠… I do as I please.”</p>
			<p>I know at least that I saw Andrey Vassilievitch frown, make as though he would get up and leave the room, then think better of it, and sink back into his chair.</p>
			<p>I remember that just at that moment Trenchard entered. He joined us and sat on the sofa near Nikitin without speaking, staring in front of him like the rest of us. His face was tired and old, his cheeks hollow.</p>
			<p>I waited and the silence began to get on my nerves. Then there came an interruption. The door opened quite silently: we all turned our eyes towards it without moving our heads. In the doorway stood Semyonov.</p>
			<p>We were startled as though by a ghost. I remember that Andrey Vassilievitch jumped to his feet, crying. Trenchard never moved. Semyonov with his usual stolid self-possession came towards us, greeted us, then turning to me said:</p>
			<p>“I’ve come to take your place, Ivan Andreievitch.”</p>
			<p>“My place?” I stammered.</p>
			<p>“Yes. You’re wanted there. You’re to return at once in the <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">britchka</i>.⁠ ⁠… In half an hour, if you don’t mind.”</p>
			<p>“And you’ll stay?”</p>
			<p>“And I’ll stay.”</p>
			<p>No one else said anything. I remember that I had some half-intention of protesting, of begging to be allowed to remain. But I was no match for Semyonov. I could fancy the futility of my saying: “But really, Alexei Petrovitch, we don’t want you here. It’s much better to leave me. You’ll upset them all. It’s a nervous place, this.” I said nothing, except: “All right. I’ll go.” He watched me. He watched us all. I fancy that he smiled.</p>
			<p>Outside I had a desperate absurd thought that I would return and ask him to be kind to Trenchard. As I turned away someone seemed to whisper in my ear:</p>
			<p>“He’s come, you know, to find Marie Ivanovna.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
