<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II: Marie Ivanovna</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Marie Ivanovna</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was on July 23 that I first entered the Forest of S⁠⸺. I did not, I remember, pay the event any especial attention. I went with Anna Petrovna to the cholera village that is on the outskirts of the forest, and I recollect that we hastened back because that evening we were to celebrate the conclusion of the first six months’ work of our Otriad. Of my entrance into the forest I remember absolutely nothing; it seemed, I suppose, an ordinary enough forest to me. Of the festivities in the evening I have a very clear recollection. I remember that it was the loveliest summer weather, not too hot, with a little breeze coming up from the river, and the green glittering on every side of us with the quiver of flashing water. In the little garden outside our house a table had been improvised and on this were a large gilt ikon, a vase of flowers in a hideous purple jar, and two tall candles whose flames looked unreal and thin in the sunlight. There was the priest, a fine stout man with a long black beard and hair falling below his shoulders, clothed in silk of gold and purple, waving a censer, monotoning the prayers in a high Russian tenor, with one eye on the choir of sanitars, one eye on the candles blown by the wind, the breeze meanwhile playing irreverent jests on his splendid skirts of gold. Then there was the congregation in three groups. The first group⁠—two generals, two colonels, four or five other officers, the Sisters (Sister K⁠⸺ bowing and crossing herself incessantly, Anna Petrovna with her attention obviously on the dinner cooking behind a tree in the garden, Marie Ivanovna looking lovely and happy and good), ourselves⁠—Molozov official, Semyonov sarcastic, Nikitin in a dream, Andrey Vassilievitch busy with his smart uniform, Trenchard (forgotten his sword, his blue handkerchief protruding from his pocket) absorbed by the ceremony, myself thinking of Trenchard, Goga⁠—and the rest. The second group⁠—the singing sanitars, some ten of them, stout and healthy, singing as Russians do with complete self-forgetfulness and a rapturous happiness in front of them, a funny little man with spectacles and a sharp-pointed beard, once a schoolmaster, now a sanitar, conducting their music with a long bony finger⁠—all of them chanting the responses with perfect precision and harmony. Third group, the other sanitars, the strangest collection of faces, wild, savage and eastern: Tartars, Lithuanians, Mongolian, mild and northern, cold and western, merry and human from Little Russia, gigantic and fierce from the Caucasus, small and frozen from Archangel, one or two civilised and superior <em>and</em> uninteresting from Petrograd and Moscow.</p>
			<p>Over the wall a long row of interested Galician peasants and soldiers passing in carts or on horseback. Seeing the ikon, the priest, the blowing candles, hearing the singing they would take off their hats, cross themselves, for a moment their eyes would go dreamy, mild, forgetful, then on their hats would go again, back they would turn their horses, cursing them up the hill, chaffing the Galician women, down deep in the everyday life again.</p>
			<p>The service ended. The priest turns to us, the gold Cross is raised, we advance one by one: the generals, the colonels, the lieutenants, the Sisters, Semyonov, Nikitin, Goga, then the choir, then the sanitars, even to hunch-backed Alesha, who is always given the dirtiest work to do and is only half a human being; one by one we kiss the Cross, the candles are blown out, the ikon folded up and put away in a cardboard box, we are introduced to the generals, there is general conversation, and the stars and the moon come out “blown straight up, it seems, out of the bosom of the Nestor.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>It was a very happy and innocent evening. For extracting the utmost happiness possible out of the simplest materials the Russians have surely no rivals. How our generals and our colonels enjoyed that evening! A wonderful dinner was cooked between two stones in the garden⁠—little pig, young chickens, <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">borshtsh</i>, that most luxurious of soups, and ices⁠—yes, and ices. Then there were speeches, many, many glasses of tea, strawberry and cherry jam, biscuits and cigarettes. We were all very, very happy.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>It was arranged on the morning after the feast that I should go again to the cholera village with Marie Ivanovna and Semyonov. Under a morning of a blazing relentless heat, bars of light ruling the sky, we started, the three of us, at about ten o’clock, in the little low dogcart, followed by the kitchen and the boiler. Marie Ivanovna sat next to Semyonov, I facing them. Semyonov was happier than I had ever seen him before. Happiness was not a quality with which I would ever have charged him; he had seemed to despise it as something too simple and sentimental for any but sentimental fools⁠—but now this morning (I had noticed something of the same thing in him the evening before) he was quite <em>simply</em> happy, looking younger by many years, the ironical curve of his lip gone, his eyes smiling, his attitude to the world gentle and almost benevolent. Of course she, Marie Ivanovna, had wrought this change in him. There was no doubt this morning that she loved him. She had in her face and bearing all the pride and also all the humility that a love, won, secured, ensured, brings with it. She did not look at him often nor take his hand. She spoke to me during the drive and only once and again smiled up at him; but her soul, shining through the thin covering of her body, laughed to me, crying: “I am happy because I have my desire. Of yesterday I remember nothing, of to-morrow I can know nothing, but to-day is mine!”</p>
			<p>He was very quiet. When he looked at her his eyes took complete possession of her. I did not, that morning, count at all to either of them, but I too felt a kind of pride as though I were sharing in some triumphal procession. She chattered on, and then at last was silent. I remember that the great heat of the morning wrought in us all a kind of lethargy. We were lazily confident that day that nothing evil could overtake us. We idly watched the sky, the river, the approaching forest, with a luxurious reliance on the power of man, and I caught much of my assurance from Semyonov himself. He did really seem to me, that morning, a “tremendous” figure, as he sat there, so still, so triumphant. He had never before, perhaps, been quite certain of Marie Ivanovna, had been alarmed at her independence, or at his own passionate love for her. But this morning he <em>knew</em>. She loved him. She was his⁠—no one could take her from him. She was the woman he wanted as he had never wanted a woman before, and <em>she was his⁠—she was his</em>!</p>
			<p>I do not remember our entering the forest. I know that first you climb a rough, rather narrow road up from the river, that the trees close about you very gradually, that there is a little church with a green turret and a fine view of the Nestor, and that there a broad solemn avenue of silver birch leads you forward, gently and without any sinister omens. Then again the forest clears and there are fields of corn and, built amongst the thin scattering of trees, the village of N⁠⸺. It was here, on passing the first houses of the village, that I felt the heat to be almost unbearable; it seemed strange to me, I remember, that they (whoever “they” were), having so many trees here, a forest that stretched many miles behind them, should have chosen to pitch their village upon the only exposed and torrid bit of ground that they could find. Behind us was the forest, in front of us also the forest, but here, how the sun blazed down on the roofs and little blown patches of garden, how it glared in through the broken windows, and penetrated into the darkest corners of the desolate rooms!</p>
			<p>Poor N⁠⸺! In the second month of the war it had been shelled and many of the houses destroyed. The buildings that remained seemed to have given up the struggle and abandoned themselves to inevitable degradation. Moreover, down the principal street, at every other door there hung the sinister black flag, a piece of dirty black cloth fastened to a stick, and upon the filthy wall was scrawled in Russian “cholera.” Dead, indeed, under the appalling heat of the morning the whole place lay. No one was to be seen until we neared the ruins of what had once been a little town-hall or meeting-place, a procession turned the corner⁠—a procession of a peasant with a tall lighted candle, another peasant with a tattered banner, a priest in soiled silk, a coffin of white wood on a haycart, and four or five white-faced and apathetic women. A doleful singing came from the miserable party. They did not look at us as we passed.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>A rumble of cannon, once and again, sounded like the lazy snore of some sleeping beast.</p>
			<p>Near the town-hall we found a company of fantastic creatures awaiting us. They were pressed together in a dense crowd as though they were afraid of some one attacking them. There were many old men, like the clowns in Shakespeare, dirty beyond belief in tattered garments, wide-brimmed hats, broad skirts and baggy trousers; old men with long tangled hair, bare bony breasts and slobbering chins. Many of the women seemed strong and young; their faces were on the whole cheerful⁠—a brazen indifference to anything and everything was their attitude. There were many children. Two gendarmes guarded them with rough friendly discipline. I thought that I had seen nothing more terrible at the war than the eager pitiful docility with which they moved to and fro in obedience to the gendarmes’ orders. A dreadful, broken, creeping submission.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>But it was their fantasy, their coloured incredible unreality that overwhelmed me. The building, black and twisted against the hard blue sky, raised its head behind us like a malicious monster. Before us this crowd, all tattered faded pieces of scarlet and yellow and blue, men with huge noses, sunken eyes, sharp chins, long skinny hands, women with hard, bright, dead faces, little children with eyes that were afraid and indifferent, hungry and mad, all this crowd swaying before us, with the cannon muttering beyond the walls, and the thin miserable thread of the funeral hymn trickling like water under our feet.⁠ ⁠… I looked from these to Semyonov and Marie Ivanovna, they in their white overalls working at the meat kitchen and the huge bread-baskets, radiant in their love, their success, their struggle, confident, both of them, this morning that they had the fire of life in their hands to do with it as they pleased.</p>
			<p>I have not wished during the progress of this book, which is the history of the experiences of others rather than of myself, to lay any stress on my personal history, and here I would only say that any one who is burdened with a physical disease or encumbrance that will remain to the end of life must know that there are certain moments when this hindrance leaps up at him like the grinning face of a devil⁠—despairing hideous moments they are! I have said that during our drive I had felt a confident happy participation in the joy of those others who were with me⁠ ⁠… now as we stood there feeding that company of scarecrows, a sudden horror of my own lameness, a sudden consciousness that I belonged rather to that band of miserable diseased hungry fugitives than to the two triumphant figures on the other side of me, overwhelmed and defeated me. I bent my head; I felt a shame, a degradation as though I should have crept into some shadow and hidden.⁠ ⁠… I would not mention this were it not that afterwards, in retrospect, the moment seemed to me an omen. After all, life is not always to the victorious!⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Our scarecrows wanted, horribly, their food. It was dreadful to see the anxiety with which they watched the portioning of the thick heavy hunks of black bread. They had to show Marie Ivanovna their dirty little scraps of paper which described the portions to which they were entitled. How their bony fingers clutched the paper afterwards as they pressed it back into their skinny bosoms! Sometimes they could not wait to return home, but would squat down on the ground and lap their soup like dogs. The day grew hotter and hotter, the world smelt of disease and dirt, waste and desolation. Marie Ivanovna’s face was soft with tenderness as she watched them. Semyonov had always his eye upon her, seeing that she did not touch them, sometimes calling out sharply: “Now! Marie!⁠ ⁠… take care! Take care!” but this morning he also seemed kind and gentle to them, leading a small girl back to her haggard bony old guardian, carrying her heavy can of soup for her, or joking with some of the old men.⁠ ⁠… “Now, uncle⁠ ⁠… you ought to be at the war! What have they done, leaving you? So young and so vigorous! They’ll take you yet!” and the old man, a toothless trembling creature, clutching his hunk of bread with shaking hands, would grin like the head of Death himself! How close to death they all seemed! How alive were my friends, strong in the sun, compassionate but also perhaps a little despising this poor gathering of wastrels.</p>
			<p>The work went on; then at last the final scraps of meat and bread had been shared, the kitchen closed its oven, we took off our overalls, shook ourselves, and bade farewell to the scarecrows. The kitchen was then sent home and we moved forward with the tea boiler and two sanitars further into the forest. Our destination was a large empty house behind the trenches. From here we were to take tea in the boiler to certain regiments, tea with wine in it as preventative against cholera. It was the early afternoon now, and we moved very slowly. The heat was intense and although the trees were thick on every side of us there seemed to be no shade nor coolness, as though the leaves had been made of paper.</p>
			<p>“This is a strange forest,” I said. “Although there are trees there’s no shade. It burns like a furnace.”</p>
			<p>No one replied. We passed as though in a dream, meeting no one, hearing no sound, the light dancing and flickering on our path. I nodded on my seat. I was half asleep when we arrived at our destination. This was the accustomed white deserted house standing in a desolate tangled garden. There was no one there on our arrival. All the doors were open, the sun blazing along the dusty passages. It was inhabited, just then, I believe, by some artillery officers, but I saw none of them. Semyonov went off to find the Colonel of the regiment to whom we were to give tea; Marie Ivanovna and I remained in one of the empty rooms, the only sound the buzzing flies. Every detail of that room will remain in my heart and brain until I die. Marie Ivanovna, looking very white and cool, with the happiness shining in her large clear eyes, sat on an old worn sofa near the window. In the glass of the window there were bullet holes, and beyond the window a piece of blazing golden garden. The room was very dirty, dust lay thick upon everything. Some one had eaten a meal there, and there was a plate, a knife, also egg-shells, an empty sardine-tin, and a hunk of black bread. There was a book which I picked up, attracted by the English lettering on the faded red cover. It was a “Report on the Condition of New Mexico in 1904”⁠—a heavy fat volume with the usual photographs of water-falls, cornfields and enormous sheep. On the walls there was only one picture, a torn supplement from some German magazine showing father returning to his family after a long absence⁠—welcomed, of course, by child (fat and ugly), wife (fatter and uglier), and dog (a mongrel). There was the usual pile of fiction in Polish, translations I suspect of Conan Doyle and Jerome; there was a desolate palm in a corner and a chipped blue washing stand. A hideous place: the sun did not penetrate and it should have been cool, but for some reason the air was heavy and hot as though we were enclosed in a biscuit-tin.</p>
			<p>I leaned against the table and looked at Marie Ivanovna.</p>
			<p>“Isn’t it strange?” I said, “we’re only a verst or two from the Austrians and not a sound to be heard. But the gendarme told me that we must be careful here. A good many bullets flying about, I believe.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” she said laughing. “I don’t feel as though anything could touch me to-day. I never loved life before as I love it now. Is it right to be so happy at such a time as this and in such a place?⁠ ⁠… And how strange it is that through all the tragedy one can only truly see one’s own little affairs, and only feel one’s own little troubles and joys. That’s bad⁠ ⁠… one should be punished for that!”</p>
			<p>I loved her at that moment; I felt bitterly, I remember, that I, because I was plain and a cripple, silent and uninteresting, would never win the love of such women. I remembered little Andrey Vassilievitch’s words about his wife: “For me she cared as good women care for the poor.” In that way for me too women would care⁠—when they cared at all. And always, all my life, it would be like that. How unfair that everything should be given to the Semyonovs and the Nikitins of this world, everything denied to such men as Trenchard, Andrey Vassilievitch and I!⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>But my little grumble passed as I looked at her.</p>
			<p>How honest and straight and true with her impulses, her enthusiasms, her rebellions and ignorances she was! Yes, I loved her and had always loved her. That was why I had cared for Trenchard, why now I was attracted by Semyonov, because, shadow of a man as I was, not man enough to be jealous, I could see with her eyes, stand beside her and share her emotion.⁠ ⁠… But God! how that day I despised myself!</p>
			<p>“You’re tired!” she said, looking at me. “Is your leg hurting you?”</p>
			<p>“Not much,” I answered.</p>
			<p>“Sit down here beside me.” She made way for me on the sofa. “Ivan Andreievitch, you will always be my friend?”</p>
			<p>“Always,” I answered.</p>
			<p>“I believe you will. I’m a little afraid of you, but I think that I would rather have you as a friend than any one⁠—except John. How fortunate I am! Two Englishmen for my friends! You do not change as R-russians do! You will be angry with me when you think that I am wrong, but then I can believe you. I know that you will tell me the truth.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” I said slowly, “Alexei Petrovitch will not wish that I should be your friend!”</p>
			<p>“Alexei?” she said, laughing. “Oh, thank you very much, I shall choose my own friends. That will always be my affair.”</p>
			<p>I had an uneasy suspicion that perhaps she knew as little about Semyonov as she had once known about Trenchard. It might be that all her life she might never learn wisdom. I do not know that I wished her to learn it.</p>
			<p>“No,” she continued. “But you forgive me now? Forgive me for all my mistakes, for thinking that I loved John when I did not and treating him so badly. Ah! but how unhappy I was! I wished to be honourable and honest⁠—I wished it passionately⁠—and I seemed only to make mistakes. And then because I was ashamed of myself I was angry with every one⁠—at least it seemed that it was with every one, but it was really with myself.”</p>
			<p>“I did you injustice,” I said. “And I did Alexei Petrovitch an injustice also. I know now that he truly and deeply loves you.⁠ ⁠… I believe that you will be very happy⁠ ⁠… yes, it is better, much better, than that you should have married Trenchard.”</p>
			<p>Her face flushed with happiness, that strange flush of colour behind her pale cheeks, coming and going with the beats of her heart.</p>
			<p>She continued happily, confidently: “When I was growing up I was always restless. My mother allowed me to do as I pleased and I had no one in authority over me. I was restless because I knew nothing and no one could tell me anything that seemed to me true. I would have, like other girls, sudden enthusiasms for some one who seemed strong and wonderful⁠—and then they were never wonderful⁠—only like every one else. I would be angry, impatient, miserable. Russian girls begin life so early.⁠ ⁠… After a time, mother began to treat me as though I was grown up. We went to Petrograd and I thought about clothes and theatres. But I never forgot⁠—I always waited for the man or the work or the friend that was to make life real. Then suddenly the war came and I thought that I had found what I wanted. But there too there were disappointments. John was not John, the war was not the war⁠ ⁠… and it’s only to-day now that I feel as though I were r-right inside. I’ve been so stupid⁠—I’ve made so many mistakes.” She dropped her voice: “I’ve always been afraid, Ivan Andreievitch, that is the truth. You remember that morning before S⁠⸺?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I said. “I remember it.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it has been often, often like that. I’ve been afraid of myself and⁠—of something else⁠—of dying. I found that I didn’t want to die, that the thought of death was too horrible to me. That day of the Retreat how afraid I was! John could not protect me, no one could. And I was ashamed of myself! How ashamed, how miserable. And I was afraid because I thought of myself more than of any one else⁠—always. I had fine ideals but⁠—in practice⁠—it was only that⁠—that I always was selfish. Now, for the first time ever, I care for some one more than myself and suddenly I am afraid of death no longer. It is true, Ivan Andreievitch, I do not believe that death can separate Alexei from me; I have more reason now to wish to live than I have ever had, but now I am not afraid. Wherever I am, Alexei will come⁠—wherever he is, I will go.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>She broke off⁠—then laughed. “You think it silly in England to talk about such things. No English girl would, would she? In Russia we are silly if we like. But oh! how happy it is, after all these weeks, not to be afraid⁠—not to wake up early and lie there and think⁠—think and shudder. They used to say I was brave about the wounded, brave at S⁠⸺, brave at operations⁠ ⁠… if they only knew! You only, Ivan Andreievitch, have seen me afraid, you only!⁠ ⁠…” She looked at me, her eyes searching my face: “Isn’t it strange that you who do not love me know me, perhaps, better than John⁠—and yes, better than Alexei. That’s why I tell you⁠—I can talk to you. I never could talk to women⁠—I never cared for women. You and John for my friends⁠—yes, I am indeed happy!”</p>
			<p>She got up from the old sofa, walked a little about the room, looked at the remains of the meal, at the book, then turned round to me:</p>
			<p>“Don’t ever tell any one, Ivan Andreievitch, that I have been afraid.⁠ ⁠… I’m never to be afraid again. And I’m not going to die. I know now that life is wonderful⁠—at last all that when I was young I expected it to be.⁠ ⁠… Do you know, Ivan Andreievitch, I feel to-day as though I would live for ever!⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Semyonov came in. He was in splendid spirits; I had never seen him so gay, so carelessly happy.</p>
			<p>“Well,” he cried to me, “we’re to go now⁠—at once⁠ ⁠… and the next time at eight. We’ll leave you this time. We’ll be back by half-past six. We’ll do the Third and Fourth Roti now. The Eighth and Ninth afterwards. Can you wait for tea until we return? Good.⁠ ⁠… Half-past six, then!”</p>
			<p>They departed. As she went out of the door she turned and gave me a little happy smile as though to bind me to an intimate enduring confidence. I smiled back at her and she was gone.</p>
			<p>After they had left me I felt very lonely. The house was still and desolate, and I took a book that I had brought with me⁠—the “Le Deuil des Primeveres” of François Jammes. I had learnt the habit during my first visit to the war of always taking a book in my pocket when engaged upon any business; there were so many long weary hours of waiting when the nerves were stretched, and a book⁠—quiet and real and something apart from all wars and all rumours of wars⁠—was a most serious necessity. What “Tristram Shandy” was to me once under fire near Nijnieff, and “Red-gauntlet” on an awful morning when our whole Otriad meditated on the possibility of imprisonment before the evening⁠—with nothing to be done but sit and wait! I went into the garden with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Jammes.</p>
			<p>As I walked along the little paths through a tangle of wood and green that might very well have presented the garden of the Sleeping Beauty, I heard now and then a sound that resembled the swift flight of a bird or the sudden “ting” of a telegraph-wire. The Austrians were amusing themselves; sometimes a bullet would clip a tree in its passing or one would see a leaf, quite suddenly detached, hover for a moment idly in the air and then circle slowly to the ground. Except for this sound the garden was fast held in the warm peace of a summer afternoon. I found a most happy little neglected orchard with old gnarled apple-trees and thick waving grass. Here I lay on my back, watching the gold through the leaves, soaked in the apathy and somnolence of the day, sinking idly into sleep, rising, sinking again, as though rocked in a hammock. I was in England once more⁠—at intervals there came a sharp click that exactly resembled the sound that one hears in an English village on a summer afternoon when they are playing cricket in the field near by⁠—oneself at one’s ease in the garden, half sleeping, half building castles in the air, the crack of the ball on the bat, the cooing of some pigeons on the roof.⁠ ⁠… Once again that sharp pleasant sound, again the flight of the bird above one’s head, again the rustle of some leaves behind one’s head⁠ ⁠… soon there will be tea, strawberries and cream, a demand that one shall play tennis, that saunter through the cool dark house, up old stairs, along narrow passages to one’s room where one will slowly, happily change into flannels⁠—hearing still through the open window the crack of the bat upon the ball from the distant field.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>But as I lay there I was unhappy, rebellious. The confidence and splendour of Marie Ivanovna and Semyonov had driven me into exile. I hated myself that afternoon. That pursuit⁠—the excitement of the penetration into the dark forest⁠—the thrill of the chase⁠—those things were for the strong men, the brave women⁠—not for the halt and maimed⁠ ⁠… not love nor glory, neither hate nor fierce rebellion were for such men as I.⁠ ⁠… I cursed my fate, my life, because I loved, not for the first time, a woman who was glad that I did not love her and was so sure that I did not and could not, that she could proclaim her satisfaction openly to me!</p>
			<p>I had an hour of bitterness⁠—then, as I had so often done before, I laughed, drove the little devil into his cage, locked it, dropped the thick curtain in front of it.</p>
			<p>I claimed the company of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> François Jammes.</p>
			<p>He has a delightful poem about donkeys and as I read it I regained my tranquillity. It begins:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>
					<span>Lorsqu’il faudra aller vers Vous, ô mon Dieu, faites</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Que ce soit par un jour ou la campagne en fete</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poudroiera. Je désire, ainsi que je fis ici-bas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choisir un chemin pour aller, comme il me plaira,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Au Paradis, où sont en plein jour les étoiles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Je prendrai mon bâton et sur la grande route</span>
					<br/>
					<span>J’irai et je dirai aux ânes, mes amis:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Je suis Francois Jammes et je vais au Paradis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Car il n’y a pas d’enfer au pays du Bon Dieu.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Je leur dirai: Venez, doux amis du ciel bleu,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pauvres bêtes chéries qui d’un brusque mouvement d’oreilles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chassez les mouches plates, les coups et les abeilles.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>That brought tranquillity back to me. I found another poem⁠—his “Amsterdam.”</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>
					<span>Les maisons pointues ont l’air de pencher. On dirait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Qu’elles tombent. Les mâts des vaisseaux qui s’embrouillent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dans le ciel sont penchés comme des branches sèches</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Au milieu de verdure, de raye, de rouille,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>De harengs saurs, de peaux de moutons et de bouille.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Robinson Crusoë passa par Amsterdam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Je crois du moins qu’il y passa) en revenant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>De l’île ombreuse et verte aux noix de coco fraîches.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quelle émotion il dut avoir quand il vit luire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Les portes énormes, aux lourds marteaux, de cette ville!⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Regardait-il curieusement les entresols</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ou les commis écrivent les livres de comptes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eut-il envie de pleurer en resongeant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A son cher perroquet, à son lourd parasol,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Qui l’abritait dans l’île attristée et clémente?⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I was asleep; my eyes closed; the book fell from my hand. Some one near me seemed to repeat in the air the words:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>
					<span>Robinson Crusoë passa par Amsterdam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Je crois, du moins, qu’il y passa) en revenant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>De l’île ombreuse.⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“De l’île ombreuse”⁠ ⁠… “Robinson Crusoë passa”⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I was rocked in the hot golden air. I slept heavily, deeply, without dreams.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>I was awakened by a cold fierce apprehension of terror. I sat up, stared slowly around me with the sure, certain conviction that some dreadful thing had occurred. The orchard was as it had been⁠—the sun, lower now, shone through the green branches. All was still and even, as I listened I heard the sharp crack of the ball upon the bat breaking the evening air. My heart had simply ceased to beat. I remember that with a hand that trembled I picked up the book that was lying open on the grass and read, without understanding them, the words. I remember that I said, out aloud: “Something’s happened,” then turning saw Semyonov’s face.</p>
			<p>I realised nothing save his face with its pale square beard and red lips, framed there by the shining green and blue. He stood there, without moving, staring at me, and the memory of his eyes even now as I write of it hurts me physically so that my own eyes close.</p>
			<p>That was perhaps the worst moment of my life, that confrontation of Semyonov. He stood there as though carved in stone (his figure had always the stiff clear outline of stone or wood). I realised nothing of his body⁠—I simply saw his eyes, that were staring straight in front of him, that were blazing with pain, and yet were blind. He looked past me and, if one had not seen the live agony of his eyes, one would have thought that he was absorbed in watching something that was so distant that he must concentrate all his attention upon it.</p>
			<p>I got upon my feet and as my eyes met his I knew without any question at all that Marie Ivanovna was dead.</p>
			<p>When I had risen we stood for a moment facing one another, then without a word he turned towards the house. I followed him, leaving my book upon the grass. He walking slowly in front of me with his usual assured step, except that once he walked into a bush that was to his right; he afterwards came away from it, as a man walking in his sleep might do, without lowering his eyes to look at it. We entered by a side-door. I, myself, had no thoughts at all at this time. I felt only the cold, heavy oppression at my heart, and I had, I remember, no curiosity as to what had occurred. We passed through passages that were strangely dark, in a silence that was weighted and mysterious. We entered the room where we had been earlier in the afternoon; it seemed now to be full of people, I saw now quite clearly, although just before the whole world had seemed to be dark. I saw our two soldiers standing back by the door; a doctor, whose face I did not know, a very corpulent man, was on his knees on the floor⁠—some sanitars were in a group by the window. In the middle of the room lay Marie Ivanovna on a stretcher. Even as I entered the stout doctor rose, shaking his head. I had only that one glimpse of her face on my entry, because, at the shake of the doctor’s head, a sanitar stepped forward and covered her with a cloth. But I shall see her face as it was until I die. Her eyes were closed, she seemed very peaceful.⁠ ⁠… But I cannot write of it, even now.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>My business here is simply with facts, and I must be forgiven if now I am brief in my account.</p>
			<p>The room was just as it had been earlier in the afternoon; I saw the sardine-tin, the dirty plate that had a little cloud of flies upon it; the room seemed under the evening sun full of gold dust. I crossed over to our soldiers and asked them how it had been. One of them told me that they had gone with the boiler to the trenches. Everything had been very quiet. They had taken their stand behind a small ruined house. Semyonov had just returned from telling the officers of the Rota that the tea was ready when, quite suddenly, the Austrians had begun to fire. Bullets had passed thickly overhead. Marie Ivanovna had seemed quite fearless, and laughing, had stepped, for a moment, from behind the shelter to see whether the soldiers were coming for their tea. She was struck instantly; she gave a sharp little cry and fell. They rushed to her side, but death had been instantaneous. She had been struck in the heart.⁠ ⁠… There was nothing to be done.⁠ ⁠… The soldiers seemed to feel it very deeply, and one of them, a little round fellow with a merry face whom I knew well, turned away from me and began to cry, with his hand to his eyes.</p>
			<p>Semyonov was standing in the room with exactly that same dead burning expression in his eyes. His mouth was set severely, his legs apart, his hands at his sides.</p>
			<p>“A terrible misfortune,” I heard the stout doctor say.</p>
			<p>Semyonov looked at him gravely.</p>
			<p>“Thank you very much for your kindness,” he said courteously. Then, by a common instinct, without any spoken word between us, we all went from the room, leaving Semyonov alone there.</p>
			<p>I remember very little of our return to Mittövo. We borrowed a cart upon which we laid the body. I sat in the trap with Semyonov. I was, I remember, afraid lest he should suddenly go off his head. It seemed quite a possible thing then, he was so quiet, so motionless, scarcely breathing. I concentrated all my thought upon this. I had my hand upon his arm and I remember that it relieved me in some way to feel it so thick and strong beneath his sleeve. He did not look at me once.</p>
			<p>I do not know what my thoughts were, a confused incoherent medley of nonsense. I did not think of Marie Ivanovna at all. I repeated again and again to myself, in the silly, insane way that one does under the shock of some trouble, the words of the poem that I had read that afternoon:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>
					<span>Robinson Crusoë passa par Amsterdam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Je crois du moins qu’il y passa) en revenant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>De l’île ombreuse et verte⁠—ombreuse et verte⁠—ombreuse et verte.⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>It was dark, or at any rate, it seemed to me dark. The weather was still and close; every sound echoed abominably through the silence. When we arrived at Mittövo I suddenly thought of Trenchard. I had utterly forgotten him until that moment. I got out of the trap and when Semyonov climbed out he put his hand on my arm. I don’t know why but that touched me so deeply and sharply that I felt, suddenly, as though in another instant I should lose my self-control. It was so unlike him, so utterly unlike him, to do that. I trembled a little, then steadied myself, and we walked together into the house. They must all instantly have known what had occurred because I heard running steps and sharp anxious voices.</p>
			<p>I felt desperately, as a man runs when he is afraid, that I must be alone. I slipped away into the passage that leads from the hall. This passage was quite dark and I was feeling my direction with my hands when some one, carrying a candle, turned the corner. It was Trenchard. He raised the candle high to look at me.</p>
			<p>“Hallo, Durward,” he cried. “You’re back. What sort of a time?⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>I told him at once what had occurred. The candle dropped from his hand, falling with a sharp clatter. There was a horrible pause, both of us standing there close to one another in the sudden blackness. I could hear his fast nervous breathing. I was myself unstrung I suppose, because I remember that I was dreadfully afraid lest Trenchard should do something to me, there, as we stood.</p>
			<p>I felt his hand groping on my clothes. But he was only feeling his way. I heard his steps, creeping, stumbling down the passage. Once I thought that he had fallen.</p>
			<p>Then there was silence, and at last I was alone.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
